This is Jockel podcast number 274 with echo Charles and me, Jockel willing. Good evening, I
go. Good evening. All right. So the last podcast, 273 we were with Anthony Herbert, Tony Herbert,
also known as and we started off his journey from a kid growing up in Pennsylvania. So if you
haven't listened to podcast 273, go listen to that right now. He tried to join the Marines at
2014, 14 years old credit. Eventually doing the Army at 17, off to the Korean War, went from
private to master sergeant, all kinds of heroic actions, suffered all kinds of wounds, shot, hit
with frag, white phosphorus burns, and also bayoneted multiple times, including one bayonet
stab that broke off in his chest. He in the Korean War served as a platoon leader, even
though he was just a young and listed guy, and eventually at the end of that podcast and at
the end of that part of his life, he was pulled off the battlefield, one of the most decorated
soldiers of the war sent on a marat. It was basically a maral tour. And first we got flown back
to the White House, met President Truman. And then basically went to London and Antwerp and Brussels
and the Hague and all the other European allies that were fighting alongside America in the Korean War.
Along the way, he met Mrs. Elinor Roosevelt. She encouraged him to go to college. He kind of agreed.
One of the quotes he says in the book is he agreed because he was already the youngest master
sergeant in the Army and he said, what am I going to do? Sit around the enlisted man's club,
telling stories about Korea. So he was sort of not not over it, but he realized that he had
kind of done what he was going to do. So he ends up getting assigned as an ROTC instructor at a high
school in Denver because he liked to ski. Goes to the third Ranger class that ever happened.
He was in. He ends up getting married to his hometown sweetheart, Mary Grace. Starts going
to college or he gets out of the Army then starts going to college at the University of Pittsburgh.
While he's there, he writes a book called Conquest to Know where, which was his first book about
the Korean War, which he later rewrote, which we covered. When it was rewritten, it was called
the Making of the Soldier. That was podcast 273 for the most part. Worked at a steel mill at night
while he was going to college and then eventually commissioned as an officer in the Pennsylvania
National Guard shot out to the two to eight iron soldiers. All right. So so then he goes to
the knees back kind of in the Army and he gets some warnings at the Army's different now.
You know, the war is over. Both the good people got out. We just left with people that shouldn't
even be in the Army that he got those kind of warnings. But he stayed in. He loves being a soldier.
He wants to be a soldier. Goes to the basic army infantry course. When's nine out of 10
awards there, including the leadership trophy, which is the leadership trophy is awarded by
the other students. Like the other students select who deserves this leadership trophy,
then he gets assigned as a Ranger instructor and he starts, he starts in the mountain phase. And so
today we're going to be reading. So the first book that we covered, we covered a little bit. So
he's written two books. Like I see written three one was conquest and nowhere. That one got rewritten
as the making of a soldier. That was the bulk of what we read last time. This time we're going to
read from his second book primarily and it's just called Soldier. Just called Soldier. And lots of
lessons learned. But as I mentioned in the first podcast in 273, there's some serious lessons
learned about life and things get really crazy when he goes to Vietnam as a battalion commander.
And we will get there. All right. So here we go. Going to the book, Soldier written by
Anthony B. Herbert. And he says this teaching young men, the essentials of mountain climbing, combat,
and survival was more of a learning experience for me. Then for them, I began discovering things
about the resources in me as well as the way the army was moving. I was an alternate instructor at
first, assigned to teach cliff descents on suspension traverses. I took it seriously. It was dangerous
business if you didn't. The ropes to be used for traverses, which were one inch in diameter and
900 feet long, cost the army about $300 each. I had set up two of the traverses on a 60 foot
cliff the day before a new class was to begin. And that afternoon, I went out to inspect the ropes.
One of the criteria for determining the quality of the kind of rope that was the present was the
presence of a tiny colored strand running all the way through its core. I inspected the first
traverse and found the strand. But the second rope didn't have it, which meant that I simply couldn't
approve its use. The strand was an indication that the machines used to put the hemp together
into a strong enough cord had worked the way they were supposed to. If the strand wasn't there,
something had gone wrong and the rope might be faulty. I went back to my quarters and wrote an unsatisfactory
report on the rope and then went to the chief instructor and told them of my findings.
The army paid good money for that rope and you want to throw it away, he argued,
we're not going to do that Herbert. I explained what I had found or rather what I had not found.
Strand shmanned, he said, you go out there and test it again by going down the traverse. If it holds,
if it holds you, it's okay. This is kind of a strange safety check, right? Go ahead and risk your
life to see if it's going to work. I returned to the cliff and went down the traverse. So he does it.
It held. It was supposed to be sturdy enough to support a Jeep. I went back and told the captain
and he ordered me conduct the class the next day using the rope. I filed the unsatisfactory
report and went to bed. The next morning, as we stood at the top of the cliff, I ordered the
class into two lines. The captain nodded his approval from nearby. One group would use the
traverse made of the rope, I'd inspect it and proved. The other would be would use the traverse
of the rope, I'd inspect it and reject it. A young corporal in the second group stepped off.
The rope snapped and he fell 60 feet to the rocks below. I went down quickly on the other
traverse. His body was so broken. It almost crumbled in my hands as I lifted him into a Jeep
and sent him to the hospital. The captain had seen what happened. He left the scene running up
over the hill. The students were nervous. They said, they weren't going through with it.
I made them a little speech on courage and reminded them that they'd all known that
Ranger training included risks. It seemed to work. We spent the rest of the morning learning how to
use the traverse. There were no further accidents and at lunchtime I went back to base where
Colonel Bierley and the captain asked me how the kid who fell was going to be. He'll be dead on a
arrival, I said, don't say that. The captain said, you can't say that. How the hell do you know?
Because I'm the one who put him on that Jeep for the hospital. He'll be dead on arrival.
The phone rang. It was a hospital calling and the captain came back to Bierley and me with a
strange look on his face. The hospital says he was dead on arrival. He reported. It was quiet in the
office. Finally, the captain said, I was responsible for the accident. I realized that sir
and I'll stand whatever comes from it. I said, you're responsible. You know he said,
you're the one who's responsible. I know sir. I know. I answered.
So I'm sure it's pretty obvious why I decided to pull out that particular quote because
that is 100% accurate. Obviously he's taking ownership for what happened, but it's not just lip
service. If you don't think something is right and you execute it, it's on you. It's on you.
A little bit more from Ranger School and this book, look, this book is
four, almost 500 pages long. And obviously I'm not reading the whole thing. There is so much good
information and I'm just, I tried to parse it down to some key points along the way, but this is a
book that is packed filled with knowledge. And I tried to bring out as much of that as I could,
some of the war stories that I don't even go into. There's all kinds of combat scenarios that
I don't even go into. Just an incredible book. Fast forward a little bit here. I didn't develop any
really sophisticated theories about teaching and I still haven't. What seemed to be important was that
the teacher know what he was talking about and be able to show as well as tell. One of the
fouls he's an army training these days is that kind of experience is no longer part of the
tradition. Kids are taught combat techniques by men who, through no fault of their own, of course,
have never spent a moment in combat. And we wonder how it is that we turn out soldiers like Cali.
Talk about Lieutenant Cali, Meal I Masker. What seemed most important then and still does
was that the students realize that the army and war are not really games at all, even though they
might seem that way at times, especially when you hear someone of the barroom tales,
or when you hear some of the barroom tales of the way it was at Inchon, where that night in the
Meekong Delta. I saw so many army teachers who were trying to make up for the times when they had
been down at the bottom of the heap, when they had been the ones taking orders. They played games
with their men, building their egos with nitpicking orders that produced nothing but descent
and ranker among the men. So often I found it that way in the military, the rules and the rags
and the juvenile coverups and the children's games that had nothing to do with creating a system of
discipline or building soldiers. It was simply an ego game. Again, I think it's quite obvious,
well, why I, you know, I'm talking about this. This is something that we all have to watch out for.
You get put in that position of authority. You got to watch out. You got to watch out. Some good
opportunity for you to pump up your ego. Make them do some stupid stuff that doesn't make any sense.
And we'll do that all day long. If you like your ego run the show, that's what you're doing. And by the
way, it creates what he say, descent amongst the troops. All right. So what he does in the next
kind of stages of the books, he gets stationed in Germany, he kind of creates this provisional
ranger, puttune, he becomes the commander of the provisional ranger, puttune,
1962 he gets promoted to captain. He's deployed to Africa. He's deployed to the, well, the
Congo in Africa, Puerto Rico, Dominican Republic, the Persian Gulf deployed to Bahrain, all in the
60s. And there's all kinds of good stories in the book about these different situations that he's in.
He's doing some kind of clandestine type operations. He's, it's just a, you know, borderline,
spies, scenarios going down, working with the CIA, interacting with the CIA, intelligent services,
and this kind of stuff. So he does all that. 1966 goes back to being a ranger instructor.
It starts working towards his master's degree in psychology, gets his degree in 1968, gets off
for the slot at war college. But of course he doesn't want to go to war college, not yet.
Anyways, he wants to go to Vietnam. And the bunch of reasons, obviously, he has always felt that he
wants to be a combat leader. And he sees an opportunity to lead. He also has never worked with
helicopters at the level they were used in Vietnam. So, so he said quote, I wanted to know I wanted
to go. I wanted to see I wanted to fight. Ask his chain to command. Hey, can I please go to Vietnam?
And he does. He ends up getting orders to Vietnam. He wants to be a battalion commander,
because by this time he's been promoted a few more times. He wants to be a battalion commander.
He doesn't show up immediately in Vietnam as a battalion commander. He has to pay his dues first.
And the way he pays his dues is my becoming the Inspector General of the 173rd Airborne Brigade.
So Inspector General, what's an Inspector General? The Inspector General,
their mission, Inspector General mission is to quote, provide impartial objective and unbiased advice and
oversight to the army through relevant timely and thorough inspections and assistance investigations
and training to promote and enable stewardship, accountability, integrity and efficiency.
Also good order and discipline and enhanced total army readiness. That's what an IG of you ever heard
that term before IG Inspector General. Yes, you have. Where'd you hear it? What movie?
I don't remember. You might have been like mash or something like this. Okay,
okay, I was trying to think of a good way to explain all those things and have you ever seen
police movies where they have the internal affairs? Well, yeah, that's kind of the, I think that's a good
comparison. Right? It's somebody that's kind of inspecting us like our team. Yeah, it's not, it's not
hey, we're out inspecting, look what the bad guys are doing. We're looking at what we're doing as
good guys. We're making sure we're doing the right things. Internal affairs always, it's
or they came off as kind of like that wasn't a good thing when internal affairs is involved.
It's kind of like they're investigating some some bad stuff. Yeah, something went something bad happen.
Yeah, Inspector General comes out and I just hits me as something more like, hey, we're almost
like a compliance officer like kind of like, hey, just to make sure everyone's kind of doing the right
thing. It's not like it seems like they're kind of on your side still. Okay. No. Well,
straight on that phrase. If you're doing the right things they're on your side. If you're doing
the wrong things just like internal affairs. If you were doing all the right things and internal
affairs came along, you'd be like, oh, cool, they're here to keep people straight. If you were
if you were a criminal or you were, if you were corrupt, right? Well, training day, your favorite
movie. Yes sir. But is there internal affairs in training day? No. So there should have been.
Right? You got there should have been someone tracking, hey, what's going on? Where's this money going?
Where's this, you know, what are these reports? Why aren't they? Yeah, like in the whole scenario for
sure, but probably not in the movie for the given that particular storyline, but yeah, yeah, overall for sure.
Yeah, that's that guy. What's Denzel Washington's character name in that movie? Do you know,
Alonzu? Okay. Alonzu would be a not a big fan of internal affairs. Most of all, although he was,
he was such a mover and so manipulative. He might have had some internal affairs people that were on his side.
Yeah, he kind of did imply that not internal affairs necessarily, but kind of like he had some people
on the inside kind of backing his moves when they were talking about getting drug tested. There you go.
There you go. So that's what that's what the IG is. And looking, I was in the Navy for 20 years.
Obviously, I saw some IG inspections go down or the IG would get called in like maybe someone's
some ammunition goes missing for an extent. It's not the kind of thing where something happens one time
and you know, the command would just kind of handle that. But if there's some kind of an ongoing problem,
the I maybe someone's falsifying travel claims or something like that. Yeah, okay. So we're bringing in the IG
who's going to give an unbiased look because, you know, maybe the commanders wrapped up in it or whatever.
Yeah. So okay. So they're not just sort of around all the time or nothing like that. They call them in the first.
It's called in the other place they could get used is let's say you work for me and I'm a tyrannical jerk.
You could then reach out to the IG. Check. So you could reach out to the IG sort of through a anonymous.
You know, let me email or something and say, hey, this guy, Jocco is verbally and physically abusive.
That's a good tip. Two, two his subordinates. So there you go.
So this guy shows up as the IG now. Now, like you said, it seems like they would be on our side.
Right? Yeah. That was my misinterpretation though. I thought Inspector General sort of like just
another guy who's there or another department kind of that's there all the time. That's kind of like, oh,
hey, by the way, guys, you guys are kind of slacking over here. So let's tighten that up. We're all good kind of a thing.
So if you were doing the right things, the right reasons you'd have no reason to fear the IG.
But if you were doing some things that were shady, you might you might not be very welcoming or you might be scared of them.
Yeah. And the IG is obviously it's a weird role to play, right? Because you're looking at your team
and you're sort of a, you can end up in a situation where you're accusing your team of doing things
that are wrong. So it's weird dynamic. And so he shows up as the IG for this brigade. And
and this is the thing about Anthony Herbert. He seems like a very, what's the word here? He's like a
straight shooter, right? Let's straight shooter that kind of a little bit of black and white,
little bit of like, hey, right and wrong, good or bad, good or evil, he seems like he's got that kind of
a personality. And actually you can go watch some of his interview. There's interviews of him on YouTube.
And you can see some of them. But you're going to start to see that. And that's sort of in the first one
that we when I did cover the beginning of this book just to talk about his upbringing. You know,
he's a church going guy. He's, so he's a, he's kind of, he's kind of a, he's very straightforward.
And right or wrong. That's what the personality comes across for the most part to me. And so this IG,
you know, he's going to kind of, he kind of comes out of the gate swinging. He kind of comes
out of the gate swinging. And here we go. He's checking into this guy. He's checking in with
this guy who's a, who's the lieutenant colonel, who they call the mayor of on K, you know,
some, some outpost over there in Vietnam. The guy is the commander of the brigade support battalion.
So he's checking in. And the guys saying, you know, I can get you this. I can get you that.
But then he says, I, I expect some cooperation from you in return. He added, like what I asked.
Well, like talking things over before they go to the general he replied, most things never even
have to reach his ears if you and I cooperate. You know, Herbert, sort of run things ourselves,
trust each other, get along and keep it all in the family. See where this is going? I stared at him
and said he had to be joking. I realized almost instantly he was not. I'm supposed to be an IG.
I said he seemed not to have heard launching and said into a lengthy recitation of his immense
responsibilities as the man in charge of the barrack, the brigade's rear area headquarters.
Everything at on K was under his purview. He said men slept where he told them to sleep and
took their meal wherever he assigned them and enjoyed themselves in his clubs and theaters and bought
from his post exchange. It suddenly dawned on me that here was a senior lieutenant colonel,
supposedly a professional soldier who was bragging about his job as a building officer, a task
generally reserved for a second lieutenant in the states and usually for a not-to-keen second
lieutenant at that. He rambled on and on about the scope of his influence and I tried hard to look
interested and concerned. Finally he stopped. It was my turn. Look, Colonel, I understand your position
and if you'll just assign me a room and a mess, I'll be glad to cooperate. I said he smiled
and relaxed in his chair. But you have to understand my position too, I added. Now he was staring.
I'm an IG. So I work for the commander who, by the way, is General Allen, not you. Since I work
for the general, I'll report to the general and if that isn't a satisfactory arrangement for you,
well then you can talk it over with the general and maybe the two of you can work something out more
suitable. His jawline straighten noticeably. In the meantime, if you're finished, I have a lot of work to do.
I concluded he looked ill. Is there anything wrong? I asked rising from the bed. No, not at all.
He said rather gloomly, also rising. I have some things to do myself. I nodded open the door
to the outer room and he left. The place was quiet until the sergeant spoke. You just made an
enemy, sir. He said from his desk, a real danger, sent me. I walked into the outer room. Real
dangerous, real dangerous, real real dangerous. I repeated smiling slightly. Yes, sir. He's okay, sir.
He said, sheepously when he noticed my grin, no kidding, sir. He's really bad news.
I took some papers from his desk and looked at him. So am I, serge. I asked. I said, and I'm not
kidding either. You see where this is going, right? So you can see where this is going. He's forming
antagonistic relationship with a guy right out of the gate. I talked about this on EF online the other
day. We talked about, take the high ground of the high ground will take you. But when you're all in the
high ground, you have to be careful that you don't, that you don't launch attacks on other people
from a position where you feel like you're superior to everybody else. You are in a superior position.
This is known, right? You when you're on the high ground, you're in a superior position. But let me
tell you this, when you start to launch attacks with the attitude that you're superior, you're
giving up some of the high ground. So and this is what's really a hard line to walk in this
book. And as I try and talk through, so I'm not going to do a good job of it. But just because you're right
doesn't mean you're right. And you're going to see this over and over again. I mean this guy is a
like morally at least he appears to be and again there's some controversy around that everything we're
talking about. He certainly appears if you read the words that he writes in this book. He certainly
appears to be a morally upstanding human being that and look at what he did, look at his heroic
actions from the last podcast, what he did in the Korean War. This guy is willing to sacrifice
for his brothers in arms. He's an incredible soldier and you're going to see how much his men,
how much his men love than revered him, which is awesome. But he's on that high ground and he's
this is this is what he's doing. He's on the high ground and he's looking down on others from the
high ground. And when you do that, they don't like it. People don't like it. Doesn't feel good.
Yeah, that's interesting. What would you, how did you just put it? Like you just because you're
right doesn't mean you're right. Doesn't mean you're right. Yeah, so there's got to be a better way
to say that. It's like just because you're right doesn't mean you should smack people in the
person. If it doesn't mean other people are going to think that you're right. Yeah, just because you're right doesn't mean you're right or
what you said actually does sound kind of cool. I feel like that should be the quote. I used to
like get into little debates, whatever, with my brother. I think I told you this before where
you know, he is. Yeah, kind of where. There's no. We understand getting debates with your brother. Yeah,
he's down for the cause and it goes hard. But anyway, so we'd we'd give him to these things,
you know, sometimes against my will or whatever. And so finally I came to the conclusion,
they said, hey, what you're saying is like right is right, but what you're doing is wrong.
Yeah. Like I see what you're saying and you're saying all the correct stuff, there's all
true stuff, it's all factual and all this stuff. But what you're doing right now is wrong. Like you can't
like force people into debates. You can't like. So it's kind of the same concept essentially.
You know, where it's like, yeah, this guy is taking the he's doing the right thing. You know,
he's he's right. He's doing the right thing. But what you're doing kind of right now in a big and
essentially in a bigger picture, there's just a bigger picture in play. Yep. And look, there's a,
there's there's things that are universally morally wrong. So there are things like that. Well,
almost universally morally wrong. There's things that you can say that that that is not correct.
That is not right. That should not happen. When he starts, he's getting into some of this stuff
early on. Look, you're right, Colonel Herbert, you're right, but you're, you're not going to
make this easy. And if you, and if you, if you run around just slapping people from the high ground,
what you're doing is you're, you're, you have to get off the high ground to slap people. You're
coming down off the high ground to slap people. And what we're going to see how this unfolds.
Fast forward a little bit. Within a few weeks, I realized that the desk sergeant had been worth
listening to. He had a peg, pound for pound. The brigade was garbage. Discipline was laxed. The
troops were slavingly disrespectful and sluggish. Mentally, as well as physically, it was obvious that
on K, it was obvious that in on K, at least there were no match for either the Vietcong or the
North Vietnamese regulars. As the sergeant said, they preferred pot to the one. But marijuana was
only an expression of deeper, more serious failure. At on K, the troops wore what they damn well
wanted to wear, including beads and bracelets. They cap their teeth with different colors, red,
blue and gold. And they called the hierarchy motherfuckers and printed fucked the green machine
on their jackets and hats. Some of them wore earrings, a few sported nose rings, and the battle
flag of the Confederacy flew for many of the bunkers. The sergeant was right about nobody giving a
damn to, almost everyone looked the other way. On K was a staff and headquarters post crammed with
chair-borne commando types. In any other war, it would have been ridiculous, but not in Vietnam.
Every careerist who could re-do his way was over there drawing combat pay while the citizens
back home were getting blood for the bill. The troops knew best what to call it, a humbug.
The 173rd was the largest brigade in Vietnam with over 10,000 men attached to it. It was according
to the manual, a combat brigade with absolutely no dead weight. But it was a humbug. There were
five so-called combat battalions in the brigade and not one of them had more than 600 physically
present for duty. Out of a total of 10,000 men, there were no more than 3,000 at the battalion level,
which means that some 7,000 were assigned to support roles. Stayed houses, pizza huts, clubs,
headquarters, the general's mess, artillery, engineers, etc. Even among the approximately 3,000
at the combat battalion level, not all were looking, not all were out looking with their rifles.
Somewhere, of course, but the battalions had their own rear areas, just like the brigade,
with their own stay-couses and their own clubs. Each battalion was composed of five companies.
One of them, a makeshift out-out fit responsible for heavy weapons, which left four companies
for walking. No company in the battalion of brigade had more than 75 men physically present and
ready to go, thus each battalion fielded about 300 combat troopers. Except that each battalion
assigned one company to guard its base of operations each day, that left the maximum of 225
man available for the field. Or 1,125 on the brigade basis, and that would have been on a good
day with everybody out and everybody with a rifle, but everybody didn't carry a rifle.
Some totaled radios, some stayed back and typed, some worked in company supply, some were
fireflies, the daily helicopter resupply lifts, and some were just planes screwed off. So on an
average day, the 173rd airborne brigade could feel a proxmily 800 men. If all of its battalions were out,
in the year I was in the brigade, all the battalions were never out simultaneously. We feel less
than 800 out of 10,000 troops in the brigade. On a country-wide basis, it meant that out of 500,000 men,
we had there at the peak of our involvement, less than 50,000 were engaged in the business of fighting
in the field. And that figure applies only if all the other outfits were doing as well as the
173rd. As General West Morlin, like to say, the 173rd was the cream of the whole crop.
It wasn't that our kids didn't fight well in the field. It was just that so damn few of them
ever got there. We had a 500,000 man army, fielding less than one infantry division in
dead in World War II or in Korea. On paper, we were hell on wheels. The report's on a column for it
in the field. And on paper, it was 98% or more every day. I've filed those reports myself and they
looked truly magnificent. All the guys at the stay-couse in the field, all the guys at the club
in the field. The General's orderlies in the field, the lifeguards at Esther William Swimming Pool
in the field. Stunning, absolutely stunning, and from time to time, I found myself and
climbed to go along with it. It was so mesmerizing that when I later took over,
but telling myself, I added another column to my reporting procedure just to keep things straight.
As in the grass, I called the new column. It was no joke. It was necessary.
And as in the grass, means you're actually in the field. You can see this guy, he's going hard in the
paint. And again, I'm reading from the book. I'm not, these, I don't, we're going to get to sort
of some of the pushback against this stuff, but we have to take him for what he's saying.
Well, we have to, let me refer to it. We have to listen to what he's saying. He goes on here.
I soon discovered that almost all the problems at any level of the brigade were either the
director or indirect result of piss poor leadership. Being an IG, so you kind of, he's got this attitude
and he's the IG. What, as you can be making friends, what's your prediction?
Being an IG is an extremely educational experience. I was spending about twenty nights a month
with assing the grass troops, blending him as well as I could, taking every opportunity afforded
me to discuss tactics. I found that one of the best ways to get to know any particular outfit
was to accompany its men on an ambush. Generally, they were disgrace. So this is interesting.
I guarantee, and I don't, you know, I don't use that word very often. He shows up as the IG
and what does he do? He starts going in the field all the time with the troops. Because he's that kind
of bro. You know, he's that kind of brother that's just like, oh, I'll be in the army. We got troops.
I'm going in the field. So that's what he starts doing. And as you're going out on patrol,
well, this is what he finds. The fault was obvious poor leadership and more specific
absentee leadership. Few of the ambush patrols, I accompanied included a senior or non-commissioned
officer. The enlisted men at humped all day long and carried their load. And then at night,
they were expected to stay awake and cut it again the next day. They took their sleep where and
when they could get it on patrol and for what most and for the most part, the company commanders
didn't know what the hell was going on or worse just didn't care. It was their fault. But the
real culprits were at the higher level, battalion commanders who rode out the procedures,
almost verbatim from the fort-bending operations and training handbook, passed them down to their
subordinates and let it go at that. They were covered. The procedures had no relationship to the
realities of combat. And you got to remember the Colonel that originally told me about this book,
this guy is the same kind of vein as Hacworth. He's coming at you. And he loves being a soldier
and he loves his soldiers. But he's got no love for the upper chain of command. You can, as you can see,
a field standards, which apply to combat conditions are important. And those were the criteria I
applied as I walked through B company's area and then he's getting into like actually being out there.
A good soldier wears even the most ragged deer well. Even in the field, he is trim,
neat and tight with pockets buttoned and no loose or hanging straps or webbing. He does not wear
sunglasses. He keeps a clean face and clean weapon and clean ammunition. These kids didn't cut it.
The reason I could only conclude was poor leadership. Leadership's the most important thing on the battlefield.
Good or bad. It was strictly a matter of leadership. He's talking about going on patrol with a
couple different companies. Take the contrast I found between B company and C company. It was the
same battalion, same area of operations with approximately the same number of troops in the same
kind of mission. Yeah, while B company was a mess, C company was struck strategic tough and ready around the
clock. They were airborne man all the way. One night I went along in a pertune size patrol
commanded by a young lieutenant. It was like clockwork, like beautiful Swiss clockwork. We moved quietly,
paused for a silent C rap meal and drifted off further into the brush to set up shop. Nobody
smoked nobody talked Charlie company in a lieutenant Webster or hunters. And as I sat tight against
a palm tree that night I felt good about being out there with them. They had a purpose. Just before
dawn Webster received orders. This is such a good lesson. Just before dawn Webster received orders
to drift back to base. About 12 miles away. Helicopters were unavailable. He was told. So orders
were to foot it back and bring along the mermaids. The thermal food containers that weighed about
30 pounds of work clumsy as hell to carry. Webster stared at me in the early morning light.
It's stupid. He said, but it's an order I replied playing at straight. He looked at me steadily
and then made up his mind. Yeah, he said, well fuck them. We're not carrying no goddamn cans back
through the bush. He turned to his radio man. Pass the word to get rid of the garbage cans and
all. We're going to take a hike so keep it light and don't leave anything for Charlie.
The radio man turned to leave and Webster stopped him with a hand on his shoulder.
The first fucking noise somebody gets it in the mouth. He warned and then turned to me.
I'll take the gig and the asked chewing. Webster had a real outfit because he was a real leader.
He had a good reputation and he earned an even larger one by the time we left. The captain
and B company and Webster and C company both at the same raw material. Yeah, one was running a
sloppy sad ass show that couldn't cut it. The other was commanding a tough tight combat ready
and combat able outfit. The difference was leadership. So there you go. That's a freaking classic
case of you get told do something stupid. What's the good leader do? Now he could have had that
argument. Maybe he said, hey, you really don't want me to carry this stuff. That's just a big pain in
the ass and he says, you know what? There's a kernel here. Fuck it. We're not doing that. That
doesn't make sense. He says this. If a legitimate study is made of that war, most Americans will
be stundled learn that we killed the hell of a lot of our own people. Once again, a failure
directly traceable the poor leadership. All that took was the sound of a booby trap or the
sighting of movement and we were prone to just open up to fire to the jungle and brush in every
direction without any idea of who might be on the right or left or behind or ahead. We did it
over and over again to ourselves. Here's an example he gives. Once again, we had killed one of our own
and this particular case he had caused his own death that was said. He was a young lieutenant out on
his first patrol. According to the report, he had set up the ambush and then left its perimeter
to establish security, which was completely asked backwards but nevertheless the way he had been
trained by the US Army. When I was in Ranger School at Fort Benning, I had seen the examples
set dozens of times without any criticism. Training bullshit. We had too many damn academics.
We trained not only with blank ammunition but with blank attitudes as well, using instructors who
had gone through the same kind of blank training men who in their wildest dreams could not relate
to a real combat patrol because it never meant part of their own experience. The Army claimed
the instructors were combat veterans and some no doubt were but most had merely been in combat
zones. Because of that kind of training, the young lieutenant was dead. The report detailed how he had
gone out from the patrol's main body to position the outpost people himself just as he had been
taught and then headed back through the deep jungle and at night alone toward his main group.
In the daylight moving through brush his heart at night, it's a formidable task.
When his men heard movement to their rear, the report related, they called him on the radio.
At least he had enough sense to take it along. So they got an ambush set up. He goes to
set some security out now. He's walking back and the guys that are in the ambush here noise.
So they call him up and say, hey, you know, we hear noise behind us. And what does the lieutenant say?
He says, Kremum and they did. He was dropped in his tracks.
Schooled, trained, ranger, airborne and he had ordered his own execution.
I tried to console myself by thinking that anybody so goddamn ignorant deserved to die,
but it didn't work. I knew he had been trained by guys like me, not me personally, but by senior
personnel like me. It was our fault. I tried to imagine myself doing what he had done
even several years earlier and I couldn't. He was worse than untrained. He was badly trained.
He had no business being out there in charge on his first patrol and his battalion commander couldn't
be held blameless either. It was sickening. We were the healthiest, wealthiest, supposedly best
trained soldiers in the world. Our army had the finest raw material of any country. We had the
equipment and the experience to do better. We fought like a bunch of amateurs. I shoved my coffee
aside and looked around the talk. There were white cloths and flowers on the tables and paintings
on the walls. It was ludicrous. I grabbed a chopper back to on K and on the way, constructed the
rest of the night, that night's pitiful drama. The dead lieutenant was from a little town in
Pennsylvania, not far from where I had grown up. A telegram would soon arrive and the middle-aged
mother would collapse on the couch in the living room while the father tried to console her through
his own tears. I imagine myself walking into the room and standing at the end of the couch,
looking down on them and saying that I had killed their kid. The vision passed and I was grateful
that he wasn't one of my men and I wouldn't have to explain it even to myself.
We had much, much, too much. Whatever the reason was, the nature of war, the difference in the
attitudes and the personnel, the abundance was overwhelming. The red cross, for instance, came
up with 15,000 individual Christmas packages for the 10,000 men of the 173rd. He's kind of going
on a rant here about just what that giant logistical and rear echelon footprint was like,
Sergeant Renn, the motel, they have a motel, the motel manager told me and booth that the tab for
the brigade's entertainment ran close to $200,000 a month. So there's all this stuff is going on
and look, he counts for a lot of this stuff that he's investigating with the IG. There's stealing
going on, there's fraud going on, there's rape going on, sexual harassment, sexual assaults,
and murder, and prisoner abuse, people going awall, there's all kinds of criminal behavior happening.
He goes into this one. The records of the stay counts and pizza hut were equally shocking.
Tons of meat were unaccounted for along with thousands of pre-fixed pizzas and truckloads of
liquor and beer. Three years later Congress would be pulling the covers off what would become known
as the club scandals. It would involve generals at the very top and the very top Sergeant of the
whole army, Sergeant Major Woolrich, whom General Westmoreland himself had handpicked as the
US Army's first top kick, even then the army would be trying to sweep it under the rug.
It was in our brigade that the investigation which led to the scandal started our investigation
launched at General Allen's request. The lines were being drawn and the IG shop was no longer
sluffed off in dinner conversations. It'd become a power and I'd become for some of my comrades and
arms the enemy. Fast forward a little bit. He's looking, he's, remember, he went there as the
IG but he's supposed to get a battalion and become a battalion commander eventually. It would be
the third battalion and I would get it in April. He said this would necessitate an extension of
my tour so I could get in my six months minimum of command time. But it would be worth the
extension he said. The present commander of the third battalion would have six months in by April,
which was another anomaly of the Vietnam War. It mattered not that a commander was doing a great
job or a crappy job. Six months was the magic number. Officer's got their tickets punched in
six months and then got the hell out to some other assignment to work on another credit or get
their another coupon certified. General West Morland had said it a long time before when I was
a major that the Russians were very envious of the way our officer corps was getting tremendous
combat experience in Vietnam and even then I knew it was bullshit. It takes a commander a couple
months to become acclimated to his responsibility, a couple more to get going and then he's gone. It was
crazy. Besides we were losing in Vietnam. A fact which the US Army officer corps seemed not to want
to recognize. It would have been better to have fought the whole goddamn war with a hundred honest
to God commanders than a thousand of the half-ass combat leader types we were producing.
Whatever gave the notion we could build a better mouse trap in six months. It was a pipe dream
and what was worse was that the leaders quote the quote leaders we were grinding out
would be not an asset but a detriment in a big war should one come. Then they would be considered
experts and the delusion would cost us plenty. So you go there, you're a Italian commander for six
months, get your box checked and then you're out. And by the way now all of a sudden you're a
Italian commander. So that means what you say is gold. Another thing he's got to deal with.
Fracking. Fracking the deliberate attack on a non-com or an officer by an enlisted man or
men was not unknown in the 173. One sergeant over in the signal section had made the mistake of
raising hell with a trooper about the cleanliness of his area. The man wired to claim or mine
outside the sergeants room aimed it right through the wall of the switch at the switchboard
went to a phone and called his victim. The sergeant lost both legs. There was a fracking in second
battalion too with seven wounded. They tried to get Nicholson with explosives and on another
occasion they tried to blow up his tactile operation center. One of the men in second battalion
had reportedly blown himself the bits with a claim or mine but my investigation failed to corroborate
this. It had been in his hands. So here's a guy with a claim or mine in his hands. That was
certain but there were two men in nearby bunker handering the candling the controls of the mine
went off. The victim had left the bunker to retrieve the mine at the request of the other two
and somehow they said the circuit had been completed. I wasn't a real detective but even though
two company commander Swarr it was accidental I did sign my report with a recommendation that the
criminal investigation division checked into it they never did.
Fourth battalion had a genuine insurrection. Herb Matsuo, the executive the battalion executive officer told
me an old Colonel living in an air condition trailer to become sort of a father figure for the
riff raff in the battalion. No kidding, Tony, Herb said he's actually pulled all the freaks in
around him and made a personal bodyguard outfit with weapons and all and the old geezers
dumb enough to believe they're responding to him. The Colonel called his men the Mafioso.
They're going to cause serious trouble, Tony. They're the worst kind of people we have over here.
They're killers and I'm not joking. You better get worded general island before it's too late. I think
I'm maybe kind of confused. So, fragging is a term where it's what it means is you got an officer
or you've got a senior enlisted person that you don't like and you kill him.
That's a thing. There you go. There's two examples. They put it in movies in Platoon. You've
seen Platoon, right? No. What? I don't hear anything. Are you serious? I am serious. I have never
seen Platoon. Well, go assignment. Go watch Platoon. Yeah, okay. So, okay, okay, it's a movies.
Uh, yeah, there's a lot of things in movies, but it's seen. That seems really weird. Obviously,
that doesn't happen. Nowties. Well, you'd certainly hope not. Yeah, I mean, I've, I've never heard
of a crazy case of fragging now, but yes, in Vietnam, it absolutely. Like, there's, there you go.
There's cases up right there. So, so, imagine this. You are a young 21-year-old, 19-year-old,
18-year-old person. You don't believe in this war. You don't like it. You don't want to die.
And in comes, you know, Lieutenant Rambo, that's like, we're going to go out. We're going to take
the fight to the enemy. And you think you can get killed. Yeah. And he's going to charge you with
being a coward or whatever. Yeah. You're killing people. That's what's happening over there. So,
you're going out on a combat operation. You get into a firefight. Oh, Lieutenant,
young Lieutenant happens to get shot. Yeah. I guess I'm training day technically that's what he did
or was trying to do where it's like, yeah, you know, we're going to see if this guy's going to
play ball with us in our, in our group. He doesn't. And then he sets him up to get killed. Yeah,
that's a, well, yeah, that's a fragging. It tries to do it anyway. Yeah, it's a real thing.
It's a real thing. There's another, he's doing an investigation of a company that got
creamed. He said, so this company like took massive casualties and he's talking through it.
What had happened with, uh, he's about to talk through with General Allen. It had been marijuana.
I took it back to Allen and he didn't like it one bit. The company had been creamed and there was an
single dead enemy. I suggested that we write it up as a lesson. The learned one that even a
knit wit trooper could understand no one individual had been at fault. I reasoned it had been marijuana.
And as bad as that was, it would serve as a valuable purpose. It would serve a valuable purpose as a
combat lesson for the living. Marijuana and guns don't miss mix. The general was staring at me when I
finished. You must be mad. I said, sir, do you realize what you're asking he said, walking over to his
window for another glance at those goddamn flowers? He's got flowers like panel planted outside of his
window. Sir, can you imagine what you've just suggested? Those were American kids. Two captains
in a hell of a lot of American kids are dead. He threw up his hands and discussed and shot sat down
at his desk and you want me to tell higher headquarters and their families that they were on dope.
Not dope sir, marijuana. And we don't have to say that everyone was on it. Just point out that
the reason they had had their asses creamed. He stood up again. I'll have to think about it.
For the time being, just keep it to yourself. Understand? I stood up. I understand sir. He sat back
down again and I will consider it. Later I read about A company's fate in the stars and stripes
and in our own brigade newspaper, the sky's soldier. The two accounts were nearly identical. The company
had put up one hell of a fight but it had been overrun by a numerically superior force at a substantial
cost to the enemy. It was one more glorious chapter in the glorious history of the 173rd
Eric born brigade. The official accounts of that night on the hill were a goddamn discredited to
every mother's son who fought worth a lick and Vietnam. The general no doubt believed it saved some
face. I never mentioned it again. So you know you get like this is Matt Mass coverups right?
And no lessons learned by the way. So that lesson learned doesn't get passed on anybody.
The story of A company's heroism and gallantry was published about the same day. The lieutenant
Colonel Joseph Ross Franklin joined the brigade as a replacement as the deputy commander. Franklin
had graduated from West Point 1949. One of the distinguished service cross in Korea. His head was
completely hairless. He shaved it. He looked like a badass combat commander. He was impressive. No doubt
and his teeth sparkled. They say he's a breath of fresh air. Abbott remarked. So here comes this
guy Franklin and I think he's the most decorated officer from his class at West Point. This guy
Franklin and that's from Korea. And so you think you know if you were decorated highly decorated
veteran from Korea and I was a decorated highly decorated veteran from Korea there's a good chance
that you and I could meet and be like hey bro right on right like we could just be you know have this
kind of unified past right sure what else could happen. You'll a little bit threaten some competition
you should have some ego scenarios right we could have that competition between you and me and I
think I'm a little bit braver than you my my medals are a little bit made of whatever yeah.
Well unfortunately no it's it didn't and it gonna be growing out.
Yeah.
Here we go. How about a briefing he finally suggested and don't pull any punches Herbert.
When I finished he had one question where that bad huh? Where worse sir but you'll see it for yourself
and it's not because the caliber of the troops either. We have the finest top sergeants I have
ever known in the army and we have the healthiest toughest privates you can find anywhere.
But the worst general he said not really I said Allen is okay. Then leadership sir I said
and then he not then as he nodded I related every last air ride scene in the brigade.
When I finished I attributed them all directly to lack of leadership. How do you mean that Herbert
Franklin asked? It was precisely what I wanted him to ask. The troops are ragged asked because they
have no one to emulate that they respect. Men are dying because leaders don't care enough to lead.
It is an Allen in particular although he's included but the real problem is that a much lower level
at the level of the battalions and the companies. If I followed regulations I'd be recommending
courts Marshall for every last battalion commander I've seen in this brigade and I've seen them all.
They write policy books have their men initial them and then try and correct any value
violations they after they occur. Nobody leads by example. They command from 1500 feet up in a chopper
then and they wear spit-shined boots like they're on parade while their men hump through the bush
with their asses half out of their trousers. Everybody plans big but nobody sees two of
it but that their plans are carried out. Our lieutenant colonels fight their battalions on paper
as if they were chest pieces on a board. That's Herbert. The office was definitely quiet until he spoke.
What do you recommend Herbert? Well since you asked kick a couple battalion commanders in the
ass get them out of their birds and onto the ground make them spend a few nights out with their
units and don't permit them the right to transfer the men they consider bad news force them to
get off their asses and lead and then we'll have a brigade. That's exactly why I'm here Herbert.
He said sir to lead. He said that's why the brigade is getting a new general to lead. General
Pierce's damn sick of Allen and his entire hajpodge. He walked to the door.
Things are about to change Herbert for the better. He stepped out into the darkness. I slipped the
files back in the cabinet and sat down for a moment to think about it. Maybe he was going to make
a difference I'm used. Maybe as Abbott had told me frankly it would be a breath of fresh air.
So off to good start. We did a little bit of growing out. Yeah.
Then we have Brigadier General. John W. Barnes took over the 173rd thus making a complete change
command. That as Abbott said was supposed to be it bring a breath of fresh air to that part of
you. So then things start to go sideways. There's a little incident that goes down the next day.
I was summoned to LZ English by Franklin the new deputy commander of the brigade.
You're a no good disloyal son of a bitch he said for openers. What are you talking about? I asked
you insulted one of my battalion commanders. When a year battalion commanders are repeated.
Yes, God damn it. Wanna mind? No sense in trying to lie out of it either because your ass is
going to swing. I was dumbfounded until he finally explained that he had heard about the call from
Northern to General Allen and Northern to said you suggested that call Franklin said you did it without
permission. What do you think I should have done? I asked to come to me. That's what for what
reason? Because I'm the commander. That's why he said and all along I thought General Barnes was the
new top man in the brigade. My eyes were wide but I tried to keep the emotion out of my voice.
I knew damn well I was treading on very thin ice. You sir are not my commander. The general is.
You can tell it's just like a bad move. He exploded and the breath of fresh air was gone forever.
I was he said again a no good son of a bitch and a disloyal liar. I had continued true. I had
he continued trying to sink angel and others in the brigade for my personal gain as the IG.
General Barnes stepped out of his trailer and Franklin hailed him. General do you know
what this Colonel of yours did he said? Shubbing his finger into my chest. The illegally warned
General Allen of an investigation we had talked about. So things are going sideways.
Yeah and that it was sort of the re I didn't even cover the thing that he did because it was
like it was almost nothing. I called the Ednor Thinkton who had been Allen's aid. It was now in his
new job and asked him if he had heard about the investigation. Is it General and Trouble? No that's
what he did. He like basically gave a heads up and but it was like a little bit outside the chain
of command so General or sorry Colonel Franklin freaks out. Fast forward a little bit.
He is in Hawaii with on leave with his wife Mary Grace. Mary Grace finally asked him about
Vietnam. A royal screw up I said your anti war Tony Herbert. No that's not what I mean. I mean I'm
just disgusted by what I've seen happening to the army I said she looked puzzled. I had already told
her about getting batying command and though she knew it meant that I would be more vulnerable
to injure your death than I was and as an IG she took it as I had as she'd always taken my career.
She was proud she said but now she looked bewildered as I talked about some of the things I had
seen. This war is not only killing our people it's ruining our army the whole damn show is run
without leaders and we're losing really losing. We talked the rest of the afternoon and finally she asked
about what would happen when my Vietnam tour was finished. Wait till you hear this I said grinning
you're gonna quit she said throwing some sand my way right Colonel Herbert wrong Mrs. Herbert.
I've got orders for the command and command and General Staff College at 11 worth. All Tony that's great
and after that I'm gonna try and finish my doctorate maybe then I can really contribute something to the army.
Fast forward a little bit I kissed Mary Grayson lay back in bed staring out at the ocean
through the glass doors at the end of our room. I thought about them all night and about the years
that had passed and the things that had happened to all of us. Now is 1968 and I was 38 years old I
had a wife and daughter and I had killed one hell of a lot of people and watched a lot more
suffer and cry and die and now Maul is gone and Pa and sister Irene.
You are what you are you dumbass Lithuanian. I thought that night is the moon illuminated the far
end of the room you are what you are and what you always wanted to be a soldier.
Get back to Vietnam and I'm just going through so much of this book what I'm just skipping so much
there's so much detail in here about all these different things that he's dealing with. These relationships
that he has with Colonel Franklin and General Barnes and how these things are just going sideways and
he gets this one point take a look take a look at this and please read it all before your
comment. Ray said handing me a file folder the investigation had been handled by major
Henry Boyer the executive officer of second battalion. I flipped the cover sheet and turned to the
first page of three inch by five inch color photographs dared to me. It was a picture of a
Vietnamese male lying on his back and what appeared to be a shell creator. His face had been blown away
in guilt beneath the picture was engraved piece on earth from the peacemakers.
Sea company 173rd airborne brigade or something that affect. I glanced at Ray.
Sea company of second battalion he he he he company of second battalion he said. I turned the
page and read it through well he said I put it down on his desk it's a cover up your damn right it's a
cover up and little old Paul here is not going to be caught in the middle. You know what Franklin
wants he asked without waiting for me to answer Franklin wants it swept under the rug.
They're exactly 50 cards out like that and he wants them gathered and covered.
And what if that's not possible? Well then I guess we just have to put the burden on Christ.
He said referring to Captain Christ the company officer of sea company. So like it's just big
cover up is going on. Make this go away no one everyone's worried about their career.
All right through through all this chaos
and he's he's been the IG at the 173rd and you don't think he's going to get a battalion
because he's kind of created these bad relationships but he ends up getting tasks getting
awarded getting task getting charged with taking over second battalion.
So he's going to be working for the guy that has hated him as the IG.
Mm-hmm. As I walked back to my sack that night I decided to use the next 24 hours prep time.
I wanted to work out the second battalion in my mind. I laid down and began and in the
states you might be able to go in and take your time with changes but not in Vietnam.
In the states you could look around for a bit and maybe take a couple of weeks before
actually making a change but in Vietnam it was a different story. Take your time in Vietnam
and men died or lost legs or arms or eyes. So I had already been looking and thanks to my
opportunities as an IG and and coachers help I knew about as much as anybody could know about
the second battalion and it all blew down to one primary conclusion. Like the entire brigade
the second battalion was fat in every area except combat. The solution was to trim.
He goes on about how he's going to get rid of people or move people into more combat rules
because there's all these people that are not doing combat. Fast forward a little bit. I didn't
like the way Nicholson had handled the men who were on the way home. Frequently they would come
back to the rear as much as 30 days before they were scheduled to depart. That was a bunch of crap.
I had learned my lesson in Korea. Rotation had been established and tigers became plussies.
So what are you talking about there and we cover that in the lost podcast?
In World War II when you went on deployment for the war you went on deployment for the war.
You were going to get to go home when the war was over. In Korea is when they started hey you're
going to deploy for six little a year. You're going to deploy for a year and then you get to go home.
Well what does that do? Well according to him it turns tigers into plussies.
They had hung back and played it safe until they until we wise up and came up with a new policy.
He who fought up front went home up front. I didn't have the authority to establish that policy
in Vietnam but I did have the authority to decide who came back to the rear and win.
I could make sure that a man kept his ass in the grass until seven days before his departure
day and I was determined that the battalion would start rewarding achievement rather than failure.
Under Nicholson the last battalion commander. If a guy wrapped a sergeant in the mouth or if he
refused to fight he came back to the rear sat on his ass waiting drinking, seeing shows,
smoking pot and screwing everything that wago downtown until he was court-martialed or given an
article 15 at which point he would pay a small fine for his vacation of several weeks or months.
Then he went back to his unit and did it again. But not with me. Every mother's son was going to
hump it and carry his share of the load just like the few already out there.
There were others so that's that's the secondary consequences that you got to think about or
unintended consequences that you got to think about. Hey if echo Charles punches his platoon sergeant
what we're going to send him back to the rear and what's he going to do through. Get drunk.
You know smoke pot. Get a vacation. Have to pay a small amount of money and you come back right
out and do it again because you don't want to fight you. We're actually giving you what you want.
Yes kind of like the kid, the teenager with the with the video he has like he gets punished and sent
to his room but then in his room is like video games and magazines and all this stuff is phone
internet, yeah all this stuff. So he'll go you know when things get tough in real life you know go
mo the lawn out on a whatever he'll act up get sent to his room. Yeah. Yeah. That's why the punishment,
the modern day punishment with kids with teenagers is phone. Yeah. Take away your phone. Yeah.
It's brutal. My kids like if I say that to my kids they're like, what?
Right. Squarsimal way quick. You're seeing Ozark. I have not seen it. Okay. So it's like anyway
I don't go too deep into it but basically they're they're put over simplifying it. They're running
from these the drug cartels. So they're trying to leave. They're trying to disappear. And so it's like
two kids. One is 12 one is like I don't know 16 17. Like girl and then the two parents. So
the parents are like, hey we gotta go. We're changing our identities and all this stuff. So here
give me your phone. The girl just starts flipping out. And it's kind of one of those things where,
yeah man like some, especially kids while it depends on who you are but a lot of times kids are
so attached to that phone. Oh yeah. Like it's such a big deal. It's the social thing like you know when
I was a kid you know you would get grounded. Right. What you meant you couldn't see your friends.
Yeah. You couldn't see your girlfriend. You couldn't see your bros like you were grounded.
Well nowadays you like you said you can send the room but you're still gonna hang out with your friends
because you're gonna be on snap. Chaps. Right. That's what's gonna be happening. Yeah. So
sending them to a room doesn't really it's not really grounding them. The way you've ground them is
you gotta get that device. Get that phone. There's so many kids that are mad at me right now.
I'll put that this one. Hey what's article 15? It's if I'm your commander and you do something wrong.
Then you can be punished under the uniform code of military justice.
The UCMJ article 15. Article 15 means that I can dock your pay. I can reduce your rank like I can apply
punishment to you. Now you have to opt. You can you can say you can accept
you can accept the UCMJ or you can say I want a court martial in which case you're gonna get
a lawyer. You're gonna get a jury and all that kind of stuff. So article 15 is going to be lesser.
It's a little bit of a gamble sometimes depending on what you did and because you could say
if I'm your boss and you did something wrong, people might be telling you just do just take
just take article 15 and you know, Joc was pretty lenient. You know he's pretty or people might be like
you don't want to do UCMJ. You don't want to go article 15 with Joc or he crazy.
He's gonna he's gonna fill my bucket. So it's kind of like what like a
I guess not like a plea bargain then because you know not like a plea bargain. It's just
accepting your fate with what your boss is gonna your boss has the authority article 15
UCMJ to say okay echo Charles he stole a piece of gear from the platoon. We're kicking them out
of the platoon. Well he's gonna go to UCMJ. So you go to you go to me on your boss and I say okay
you stole gear. We're taking your try and you have to pay back the money. I'm bossing you down in
rank and you're gonna go to the break for 30 days. There you go. Now you could let's say you didn't you
thought you didn't steal it and you you want to make a case you could say I request court Marshall
in which case and how are we gonna court Marshall now you get a lawyer that says well he's he was just
borrowing that gear right and everyone knows that that you're lying. So that's the kind of similarity
to going to trial. You know all guys like no I'll take this. So in that case it is. Except for
you don't necessarily know what the bargain is. Right so it's not like a plea bargain. It's
just like a blind. Just a little bit of blind. It's a little bit of blind but it's sort of is
a little bit of like hey look I know I kind of did this I'm throwing myself at the mercy of the court.
Hey boss I screwed up I'm sorry hit me yeah like pleading guilty essentially you know my
inner kind of way because the you know that you're kind of yep it's up to the judge I was like okay
you're putting it in your phone your kind of that kind of stuff out the mercy the court.
That's the 15. What is forgive me by the way I'm demediating what didn't you and I've heard this
here you guys say this all the time taking your tried and what does that mean you're not in
maybe see anymore. Yeah just straight up you can't get it back. You can't go through the whole deal.
Yep. Yep. That's kind of everything right? Not kind of. That's everything but you're still in the
name you though. You can still be in the name you know but that's not your jam if you're a seal typically.
Yeah it's not your jam I remember there was a guy that stole a pair of sunglasses from
like another guy. Yep. They had his they had a capins mask the next day for a little
article 15 took his bird he was gone like that how's it always pretty new guy because if you
are a thief in the team's yeah it's brutal you you are gonna get you are gonna get crushed like you
will get there's there's you can leave anything out in the seal teams you can leave a freaking
diamond uh uh in crusted knife yeah and no one will touch it in the team. You don't know we don't
steal anything in the team's. Yeah and that makes sense I mean especially like such when you're like a
cohesive or supposed to be cohesive team you know. Oh yeah you're gonna steal something yeah that's
like nuts. He's still still still he sunglasses too I mean day. Oh I know especially when you
get issued sunglasses hey supply guy I need new sunglasses and I don't even know what all the
circumstances were behind it because let's face it we all have Oakley's back. Yeah
can you do we're all wearing the same sunglasses so I don't know if I do had some engraving on there
or scratch his name into it whatever but man this guy was gone and that makes even less sense when
you think about it because it's not like you're not gonna wear him when you're gonna do just
steal him and put him in your house under your pillow or something like this you're gonna be wearing
them around. Who knows maybe there was other things that I didn't know about I was a new guy I didn't
know anything there's like hey don't steal shit I'm like cool god it's not like we're not stealing
in the zoo things if freaking pissed me off on time when I went to my first ship board deployment
and a guy stole I had my gear out and a guy stole a knife. They wasn't from my
petune but it's just somebody on the ship maybe it was a marine maybe it was a navy guy I don't know
oh you didn't find them no we never found them but same thing like what's this guy gonna do he's
gonna hide that knife and then take it home and put it under his pillow like he's not gonna be
able to use it because we'll see him and then we'll throw him off the ship. Yeah man yeah and that makes
it even here about a guy stealing from someone else on the team it's like bro yeah you're
known to mess around that guy anymore the probably had a guy's name I forget his name
he stole a video game systems like a super Nintendo or something like that from one of the
guys in the dorms on the football team both of them and they were like it was weird because yeah my
friend the name's Dave he's the one who got it stolen from he was like looking around for
he's like you know you're just confused it's not like something kind of steal your whole video
okay I do your dorm room and he lives in the same dorm too so it's like it's like what do you
set it up for doors down that's what I'm saying so it was just gone so he was confused and then
after what's like no someone stole this you know so they you know they went through the thing and
they were like dusting for prints which was like you know that doesn't matter because everyone
comes in and out of the dorm so it just doesn't didn't even matter but I think Davey was suspicious
of this guy I don't know if he became suspicious or he was already suspicious so he was so
he was so he was so he went to his room and just was like you know what I'm gonna get to the
bottom of this thing and he was like asking him he was like what are you talking about on that
or whatever became his big thing and then he looked and in the dorms there's these beds right
the beds are like that and you can like take there's like a drawer under the bed and all this stuff
right you know everything got a fit uh got a fit in the door so he pulled out the drawer of the bed
and like took you know you can take out the drawer so he unhooked it and like took it out and
blown there it was Davey did that Davey did that too yeah the guys it was a call out essentially but
you know when you call somebody out you better get the stuff because you know look dumb you
must have been super suspect then yeah he was like because that's weird too imagine accusing someone
right yeah but also you can kind of tell oh yeah I am looking at someone you can tell yeah and consider
it's really not all the freaking lies yeah and usually but and consider even I mean I'm sure
it's like this in the military too where you kind of consider who could or had the opportunity or
whatever and if they did what would they have done it's like oh they could keep it in front of
you if they can practice the other day and I come all of them on my shit's gone exactly right yeah
so I think there's that kind of going on as well and then we had some circumstantial evidence
then he read his face and probably so they arrest them straight up everyone was like oh my
I can't believe this even happened like why would you do that it just wasn't computing for a lot of us
and boom they arrested me using jail so this guy I remember his name I don't want to call him
out to me but he uh so he calls the coach like you know you know when you're in college let's face it
like you get into some sort of thing you say hey coach I'm in this thing like what can we do to
sort of you know I hope to work it out so he calls the coach and he's like hey this is what
happened I mean jail I think you need to get bail out because he didn't live in Hawaii he was from the
from the mainland so it's like you know it's hard because anyway he calls the coach and the coach
you know he's disturbing those rod in there okay that's what I like to do I gotta say
that's what I like to do yeah don't like thieves no don't be stealing don't steal
otherwise you're gonna get UCMJ article 15 alright
um going back to the book here there were other things running through my mind that night
tactics for instance the infantry maximum was just a slogan and I wanted it to be in practice
find them fix them fight them and finish them but it simply wasn't being used I wanted to change
that find them use reconnaissance and intelligence the reconnaissance platoon is being used as a special
ambush unit rather than for reconnaissance the battalion had to have eyes and ears it's area of
operations was bordered on the east by the south china scene and on the what south china c
and on the west by string of mountains running north and south from those ridges a trooper with
binoculars could see in most cases all the way to the sea but it wasn't being used fix them fire
and maneuver one pins them down with fire while the other runs up around the rocks and comes in
from the flanker from the behind fire maneuver have always been the key to infantry success
but in Vietnam we were just calling in artillery and backing off the way the next day we would
go and pick up the pieces in generally there weren't any except for the women and kids who hadn't
had the sense to make it out of the area fight them close with and destroy the enemy the military
enemy killed them or capture them but and emphasize prisoners because they give information
that leads to more prisoners dead men are just dead men capture them if possible but if not
finish them off for good i lay there in my sack that night trying to put it all together in my mind
where i had been and what i had done and how i got to where i was at that very moment in time
and space i was alive i decided because of two things sheer luck and not forgetting i attributed
to nothing else but i knew that the presence of mine had a great deal to do with one's fortunes
i also knew there were some things beyond anybody's control they just happened regardless of
planning or preparation or skill or courage or cowardice i went to sleep thinking about all that
the next day i poured over my batalion plans again and when i hit the sack the next night
i knew i was ready as i'd ever been i slept well so i'm gonna jump through some of this
stuff right now this is where he starts he takes over the batalion he starts squaring things away he starts
going on operations he's still having it's not an overnight process not like the batalion oh there's
new commander like we're good to go now everything's perfect it's not like that um and as he's
starting to dig into the he's going on some ops he's starting to dig into trying to find out how to get the
he get the platoon's moving in the right direction um he's got he sits down to talk to one of one of
these latinits he's talking to the sleutannet and the lieutenant kind of he this lieutenant doesn't want
to go in the field doesn't want to go in the field and he's trying to figure out why and the
lieutenant says you know not with this particular leader and he says why not and he's kind of
doesn't want to say anything he's finally says tell me and he and then he says he opened up he had been a
platoon leader and his group had police up a detainee from a village that had reported the details to
a CEO over the company net the platoon had began to tie up the the detainee for extraction
when the co called back the lieutenant told me the co said what they had out there was a kia
a dead dink a body count of one to which the lieutenant replied that he did not have a dead person but a
detainee and reasonably good health so he says no what we have is a dead dink killed trying to get
away the lieutenant continued so what did you say I asked well I told him the guy might be a civilian
and what did he say he said that wasn't hardly possible because once he's dead he's a dink
which in fact was about the only way it was played in Vietnam regardless of what a person might have
been before he was killed afterwards he was a dink very very damn few people ever reported
killing a civilian regardless of how unavoidable the death might have been and very damn few dead
civilians failed to be included in body counts it was time to stop the lieutenant though before
his narrative went beyond the point of no return I held up my hand hold you do you understand
did that make sense because I know I jumped in the story so basically this young lieutenant is there
they have a detainee that they've captured and he calls his company commander and says hey company commander
I got a I got a captured individual I got a detainee you know what do you want me to do
and the the commanding officer calls back and says you don't have a detainee you have a killed an action
and you know that the the term dink obviously this is a slur and but it it doesn't just mean it means
enemy that's what they're saying if you kill someone they're enemy with so he's he implying that you
should he should kill him yep yeah and he's about that's what he's he's about to get to that part
and and Colonel Herbert says hold on and he he says hold it I cautioned him sir look before you get too
far there are some other questions but first you have to realize that if you say what I think you may be
going to say I'm gonna have to report it therefore it's only fair in fact by the regulation in
fact it's required by regulations and the UCMJ that I make you aware of your rights do you understand
yes sir well then let me ask you this do you understand your rights under article 31 yes sir I do well
let me go over them again for you anyways you don't have to say anything anything that you say can be
used in court you can stop right now or or you can continue or you can have a military council right
here while you do talk if you wish and that's an that's it in a nutshell now do you want to go on
since I've gone this far for Christ's sake lieutenant at least think before you answer my next question okay
okay was the execution in fact carried out yes sir it was now lieutenant here comes the big one
and let me stay it again that you neither have to answer nor you expected to answer just because I'm your commander
if it's going to incriminate you I want you to understand that part for sure do you yes sir I do
all right then who actually did the killing he started to answer and then stop the abruptly
abruptly sir I prefer not to answer that one right now if it's okay with you that's your
prerogative you keep this to yourself until I get back to you do you want to put it in writing
I think that I think I'd better do that good he said I said handing him a pad bring it back
when you finished and forget about going out and see company right now it can wait so obviously bad situation
he starts to run it up the chain a command who's that include Franklin what does Franklin say
what the hell kind of commander are you he asked it's none of your business what occurred before
you assumed command I'll back it up with an investigation I said there'll be no investigation
says Franklin it's required sir I got damn it Herbert I'll handle it I said I'll handle it and I will
if anything is done it will be done with the general's approval and it will be done by me can you
understand that much I understand sir do you want to statement from major boyer I want nothing
until I'm ready which means I don't want anyone discussing it either
that
so while he's dealing with all this and while he's continuing to create friction and again there's
so much of this and there's so much in this book so many good lessons here's here's a lesson
he's talking about planning and how he planned because he's still leading troops he's still
they're still doing all kinds of operations he says this to his troops I want you all to come
up with the plans and recommendations I told them and I meant it hell I didn't profess to be an
expert in anything and by the way if you're a leader just write this whole thing down I didn't
profess to be an expert in anything I was the dumb son of a fine coal miner and I could use
all the help I could get if anybody came up with a brainstorm I damn sure wanted to hear about it
and that includes suggestions for a commander raid on Hanauoi from Doctali I concluded
I really wanted to listen to them because if a man makes a contribution to a plan he has a material
interest in making it succeed so the trick is to forget about taking credit for ideas and to persuade
others that they are their own take notes I talk about that very thing all the time
he also says I thought out everything and tried not to waste words or time frequently may have
appeared to have been spur of the moment response but it was generally prepared even though they were
volunteers as all paratroopers are the grunts were different the grunts were by nature different
they were not career men in the same sense that officers and most of the senior NCOs were
career men and they were not sensitive to opportunities for promotion or self a grand
diesmen but because individuals are aggressive and competitive by nature the grunts did require an
opportunity to express those instincts or in a word a chance to operate I knew the grunt hell I was
one of them promoted grunt to be sure but still a grunt I'd been an enlisted man over half my entire
career I had fought as one and been wounded as one and I understood what made a grunt tick because
I knew what made me tick I'd also been fortunate enough to gather enough psychological insight
to comprehend them and myself even more deeply and thoroughly at the same time gaining enough military
experience to recognize that they were the best raw material in the world they were bigger and
healthier and more intelligent and better educated than any soldier the US army had ever had the
opportunity to use before and they were superior to any soldier any other country was getting
even with our training shortcomings and there were by god plentiful the grunts and Vietnam were
still the best trained men around as well as the best fed and best equipped more over I think I
recognize something that must have slipped by most of the brass including Westmoreland and later Abrams
that the length of the hair on a man's head wasn't nearly as important as the caliber of the
brain inside I knew that the grunt was a man just like me and that he was entitled to the same
respect I myself demanded his dignity was sacred it could never be changed the commander could
scream and rant and rage and curse like a sailor but he could never encroach on the troopers dignity.
If the leader attacks his troopers dignity the trooper has but two alternatives to fold up
roll over and die or strike back I was determined to follow the pattern that had worked for me in the
past to allow my men to make at least as many of the same kind of mistakes as I had made and god
knows I had made my share and more to deal with them honestly to to express admiration respect love
patriotism and my own conviction that he represented with all my faults with all its faults the
greatest country in the history of civilization and the mightiest combat arm this universe ever
assembled under a single power to persuade him that it not really been equipment and mass production
in a one world war one world war two in Korea for us but rather blood guts courage know how and a
steadfast devotion to a cause.
Respect to your people.
I laid out the strategy for my battalion it was some lousy war when a piddling battalion commander
had to lay out a master strategy but that's the way it was hell nobody else laid out anything
for these men either from a national or an international perspective I ordered to them to give them
some kind of purpose and a reason at the battalion level at least got to know why you're doing
and what you're doing and he's saying they're not even hearing that fast forward a little bit
in fact the whole damn US army in Vietnam was crazy the generals west moreland Abrams pierced
Ross and depue Richardson you will ramsey and the rest were all working on the premise that
they were the best in that whatever problems we were having were the fault of the commanders at
lower levels.
Bullshit.
The major leadership problem in Vietnam was the generals and the rest of the senior officer
corps the colonels the lieutenant colonels and the majors the captains the tenets and list
men weren't to blame the generals were has bins or never bends from world war two vintage
who had paper images built up by the public information people so again you know we're we're
reading this book and really he's placing the blame on everybody else which is not good
but he's telling what it looks like from his perspective.
He says about those generals they walked and talked like leaders in war ribbons and
uniform so it was only reasonable that back in Washington they were regarded as leaders and we're
listened to.
If you were in the military you must be a great leader right we still have that anybody that was
in the military must be a great leader.
So I wish it was true it's not always true unfortunately.
Again he wasn't just talking he's guys not just a talker this guy is not when he's talking
smack about these other leaders he's not just talking smack and and say no they're not leading
he's leading he's actually leading there's all kinds of stories in here here's one I cross the
yard there out on the mission across the yard to the bunker and nail myself up against it's
outer-redge.
Chewhoe I shouted using the name of the program we had set up for leniency and return for immediate
unresisting surrender.
Chewhoe as always there was no response I waited then stepped back and fired two quick rounds
into the sandbags around the doorway then stepping back against the wall I lifted a grenade
from my belt the old woman on the porch screamed and there was one hell of a scuffling inside the
bronzer bunker.
They tripped all over each other coming out hands first two hoi two hoi me two hoi two hoi they
were shouting I figured you were I mumbled to myself there were three of them two in
khakis and the wounded guy stripped down to his shorts.
I nudged them toward warden keep them covered I said I'll get the bunker I'll get it
searched midi said trotting across toward me God dammit keep that group covered I shouted I'll get
the damn damned bunker we all get paid by the same people.
I don't think it was bravado it was just that I had learned years before that if you wanted to be
followed then you had to get your house out and lead by setting the example.
If I expected other people to go down inside bunkers and holes after the enemy then I had better
be ready to do it myself this time it was my turn I kept my rifle in front.
Someone shouted grenade and the others hit the dirt I dropped them one knee holding my head down
low in front of my shoulders I saw the guy break out of the bushing out of the bush with another
grenade in his hands I squeezed twice on the trigger and watched the rounds slam his two is chest
driving him up against one of the palms bouncing him off into the bushes two of our men had been hit
by the explosion I didn't remember even hearing their grenade detonate except vaguely perhaps that's
how unimportant grenades were for me at least I'd seen them all over the world and had used
them and had them used against me over and over I did not respect them as a weapon they were charges
they blew up and out lay one an arms length stay down flat and the worst you would do
was give you a concussion run and you got some shrapnel in your ass watch him I said and turn to
the ray that grenade came from the building you take that side and I'll take this one I turned the
muzzle of the M16 west and followed it around the building I heard the ray fire just then a grenade
exploded and I got the building just in time to see the ray kicking away the reads and dragging
the body from between the false walls the guy had been wedged into a section about the size of a bird
cage the red nudged the bloody the bloody body with his foot a loser sir he said quietly gently
with that same catch in his voice that you hear in the movies just before tears a god damn loser
dink he rolled it over gently the guy had been a real trooper and he had tried to do just as he
had been told just as so many of our kids had been told and would have tried had they been in his place
uncle hoe would never even know the poor bastard was dead nor would he have given a shit if he had
known like those on our side he was just another statistic we left him there in the dirt
we started back down the trail at a truck and outright run was out of the question because
more than likely if you broke out of the bush running you were a dead ass even at our speed it was
more than a few seconds before we reach a large grassy clearing the american lieutenant
the advisor was on my left as we entered the clearing and the rest of were standing around in
no particular formation across the clearing I saw one man a Vietnamese holding the young girl's
hair with his left hand bending her head back bearing her throat his right arm was around her neck
and a knife in his right hand was dug deeply into her flesh beneath and to the left of her
softfrogus all he had to do was pull and she was gone one of the children was hanging onto her
pajamas screaming and the other child's face was being steadily squashed into the sand by the foot
of another Vietnamese soldier the child was suffocating I shoved the american lieutenant out of the way
and shouted something staring at the guy with the knife in the girls throat he was staring at me too
these Vietnamese these are South Vietnamese soldiers and this the first person that he pushed out of the
way was a was an american advisor so he comes on this scene in this in this clearing and there's
an american lieutenant he pushes that guy out of the way and these Vietnamese soldiers that the american
lieutenant was an advisor to all this is happening so these are these are South Vietnamese soldiers
with the with the young girls we have pulled them to hold the knife to this young girls throat so
this is a ally so this Vietnamese soldiers staring at herber with the knife to the girls throat
back to the book with great ease he pulled the blade across her blood spirited and gushed down
the front of her pajamas and she dropped to the darkening sand pulling the child with her it took
no more than a second from the instant he moved the knife until she crumpled in a lifeless
heat per baby still screaming still plying at her legs her killer jumped back in the group of
Vietnamese pulling with him the guy who'd been suffocating the child I should have shot them on the
spot while I could still identify them the rest of the detainees were lined up against the bushes
four of the men were already dead lying off in the grass to my right with their heads blown away
a Vietnamese soldier was parading up and down in front of the survivors waving a pistol
I noticed that one of the four dead men was the stud we had captured in the hut
I felt myself go empty something dreamed from me in that moment that you that I have yet to replace
you dumb son of a bitch I screamed grabbing the american lieutenant by the by his shirt
in that instant I was only a flick away from killing him it passed I calmed and turned him loose
just what the hell did you let happen here lieutenant he was only an advisor he said
there they were only doing a job they knew their business guerrillas weren't protected under the
Geneva Accords they were following orders oh god I thought a big badass to american
who had never killed anyone in combat or captured a single prisoner legitimately had played hell
with these poor devils big badass to all american boy god I was frustrated I raised my hand to
slap him clear across the area I lowered it you get all your scrap together and then get the hell
out of here I screamed at him so I have a job I glanced down at the four dead men and over to the
woman's body not anymore you don't lieutenant he was staring at me with what seemed to be disbelief
I moved his near to him as possible without touching now get your people out of here out of here
I said quietly and calmly you're finished here the rest of this like the charges will take care
back at base so he witnesses this this this this atrocity and gets back to base
runs it up the chain of command tells to frankly Franklin frankly Franklin he tells Franklin what happens
Franklin finally asked what had happened and I told him every last sword detail right down to the blood
leaping from the girls throat Herbert you're a goddamn liar he said I sure to my wasn't lying there are other
witnesses sir then you're exaggerating he said did the american did the lieutenant take part yes sir
he was in charge he had assumed responsibility from sergeant warden but did you see him do any killing
no sir I didn't then you're a goddamn liar there were no US personnel involved he said god
damn it Herbert you're always coming in with these wild-ass exaggerated stories trying to make trouble
what the hell is wrong with you you're getting carried away maybe you're getting too old
a day or two so so they start going through and this is what's really interesting about this book is they have
like the the actual documents from this guy Warden I started in first class Warden
during the period of 14 February that's Valentine's Day 1969 was a platoon sergeant for so he explains
what he saw happen and you can get this book and read those documents then this happens a
day or two after the St. Valentine's Day massacre which we just read about a black trooper named white
refused to go into the field and offered his refusal loud and clear out in the battalion street where he
could be heard by one and all you're going out white just like everybody else I told him
like hell I am you son of a bitch I ain't fighting for no whiteies right white
you're going to fight for your country or for your dollars or for anything else you can think of
but by god you're going like hell I am he said taking off his glasses and slamming them against the
ground they were unbroken he stepped on them and ground them into tiny pieces now you bastard he said
I ain't going because I can't see I shrugged and laughed at him so I'll have you put on a
listing post guys with that eyes always do better at night you dumb son of a bitch he laughed you
don't understand you send me out there and I'll dessert know you won't white because out there baby
ain't back here you leave the guys out there and you're on your own I tapped them on the chest
but listen I'll tell you what I'll do you go a wall out there and make it back here and I'll give you a
bronze star and even if you don't I'll see to it that you get a purple heart out there when you're on
your own your anybody's and everybody's meet if Vc or NVA don't get you the locals will you are
money and they're all bounty hunters I'll cut out as soon as I get back then know you won't
because you either straighten out here either straight now out out there or when the company returns
you'll be transferred to a unit that replaces them you reached into his shirt pocket and pulled
out another pair of glasses he was swaggering away he swaggering as he walked away toward the helicopter
big guy big bad guy you'll get yours baby
the best I could do is hope that the best I could hope for would be that he would do a good job it
was his only chance if he didn't cut it he was going back out with the next unit just as I had promised
it was the only way reward the right response and do everything you can to get it most of time it
worked with white it didn't so just to kind of debrief that we heard earlier about his policies
he doesn't want to punish people for acting badly so if this guy with his old Italian commander acted
this way he'd get okay you're you're in trouble you need you need to go stay in the barracks
and you're going to go to you see MJ and whatever but he's not going to go fight which is what
he actually wanted so his deal is not only are you going to go fight but if you don't do a good job
when this when this platoon gets back from this mission you're going out with the next platoon
until you do a freaking good job he performed poorly in the field just as he vowed he would
and I had him held at the gate when his unit came back
I had asked children which is his senior on to go to get the very best trooper he could find
to guard white until the replacement unit he was going to join came out someone who wouldn't
scare and he came up with pfc shnelling don't take any crap from him I told shnelling and watch
out the unit coming out will pick him up that was it except that shnelling drilled him through the
head and killed him right outside the gate white had some words and shnelling had paid no attention
white had made a threat and then gone for his rifle he got it to his shoulder before shnelling
squeezed the trigger and the MP at the gate had seen and heard it all thank God it was that cut and
dry shnelling had done his job I brought in the criminal investigation division people they
questioned everyone took statements and that was it except that later in the day I had shnelling
into the office a crowd of white's friends gathered outside chanting we want shnelling we want
shnelling he killed a brother he killed a brother we want shnelling we want shnelling
freaking nasty I'm this is like horrible so again just to make sure everyone's tracking
he puts in the guy comes back he hadn't white comes back hadn't done a good job
so he's got him standing by for the next platoon that's gonna go out while he's standing by
Herbert puts a guy to guard him this guy named shnelling shnelling's out there guarding him
white makes a move shnelling kills him luckily there's a witness which is the MP
who had seen and heard it all so in now they're in the office of Herbert and there's a crowd out
front of white's friends saying we want shnelling we want shnelling he killed a brother he killed a brother
and here's what Herbert does I reached over and picked up my M16
look shnelling you are now a spec for so he promotes him and says not because you killed a man
but because you didn't fail to do it when it was your job now about that out there that's up to you
I'll tell you what I do I'd walk out there and end it right now I'd pick out the biggest mouth
out there and walk up and explain the facts tell them you tell them that you just made
corporal and if they don't clear out you might take it into your mind to try for sergeant
I jacked around into the M16 chamber I'll cover you from up here and if anyone so much
as raises a weapon I'll drop him that's the least I can do I shrugged
he stepped through the door and walked over to the group I could not hear what he said but they
dispersed and I never heard white's name again which is sad too that a man could die and snap
just fade out of people's minds and disappear
you're gnarly want to talk about some leadership challenges that's like insane right
that's insane
yeah I mean does this kind of stuff still happen like now yeah it's just seems so almost like wild
Westish oh yeah that that's that section right there like that's a that's an insane the whole thing is
freaking crazy yeah yeah that is crazy I mean like there's so many elements too you know
where it's like all right you know you have a friend he gets straight up just killed but
you know and it's like it's hard it's one of those deals where you kind of got to take sides a
little bit or whatever right if you're in that mix or whatever so your guy your friend your brother
gets killed by another guy so it's like all right we got to see vengeance this is obviously
out of line obviously not part of this you know we're all the same team where you're going to kill this
guy all you know no matter what happens kind of like you didn't have to kill him it's easy to be like
you didn't have to kill him whatever so yeah of course so they want vengeance they want just
as they want like all this stuff or whatever and they kind of have a point in in a in a way
especially if they don't know the whole thing they kind of have a point yeah well you're also
so let's face it there's a huge assumption that the lone MP is just of the big witness right
this one I mean what if what if shaleings friends with the MP so hey I got this issue with this guy
or hey we just had beef and I shot this guy you got me and he's like yeah that's what happened
he showed it is weapon right one guy one is it's it's it's it's such a freaking nightmare
and then okay then then it gets worse so where you know he's he's like hey this is what you
should do this is what I would just crazy but there's a lot of no and the thing is but that's
not gonna I mean of course it worked right but we don't we don't even know what he said we don't do
in the moment before he went out but that's not gonna work but these guys like they want to
they want to kill me already you know I already killed they're got like we're at war right now
with this war within the war going on right now here's what here's the only thing that makes me think
well how it turned out you think well I I wonder if his friends were kind of like
look we know why and why it was kind of like he maybe he you know maybe they knew what type of
person he was and you had that he was close to the ragged edge or whatever but god I don't even know
what to say about this like it's just a freaking nightmare this whole book is freaking crazy like
when you think let look at what we just read you got this freaking soldier killing another soldier you
got the woman getting her throat slash there's four other people executed it's madness all right
under what circumstances do you slay the girls through because obviously the girls not military
nothing like this yeah mean the you know oh she's a vc sympathizer that's you know probably what their claim was
yeah yeah I guess I will give you no circumstance if that's what you're looking for right
well I shouldn't say that you know this you know you could obviously be in some kind of a
hand-to-hand combat scenario where you've got an enemy fighter that happens to be female
you know could happen with their baby okay yeah I mean there's a thing okay in this scenario
it makes no sense whatsoever in this scenario Herbert saying look that's a freaking war crime
that's what he's saying that's what we're two like Herbert he's you know like on the like he's
uh what I say earlier he's a straight-laced guy right he's like a straight-laced guy
that's when he sees stuff like that it he's unacceptable to and and that's what's about the
about the guy white getting killed he's not the Herbert's not the kind when I'm Herbert
you remember in Korean War they go hey burned down this village he's like I'm not gonna do it
they they bring that up and that's kind of why focused on some of that stuff and um it when we did
the last podcast you know he had had this he he he mentioned that they had uh the first black
replacement showing up and he was like we didn't you know we don't the what the troops didn't care
if you did a good job you were we're good he talked about the fact that he was raised
by that doctor that was like hey all these people in the world they're people like you they're
out there aren't trying to feed their families so he's seems like he's this kind of straight
laced for lack of a better word good person man I like to sit down with this dude he's not alive any more
button I know you haven't seen the movie Platoon pull you should watch it that shows a lot of chaos
mayhem but all these things that you read all the books you read about Vietnam and all the movies
that you see about Vietnam like it's all wrapped up in this in these scenarios that are just freaking
insane I mean one of your soldiers kills one of your other soldiers after you say hey you you got
to go out it's like nuts and then you're thinking well look then you're thinking is it worth it
like hey this guy white I could have just said all right fine you're not going out right fine
you go see I'll put you on kp dude you can go peel potatoes you know what I mean and then what happens
a bit I and then other people like well I don't want to go out either so now what are we doing yeah
I mean it kind of could be viewed as like yeah man that's like that's how it needs to be almost
yeah it could be and this is why it's that you got to be very careful about painting yourself
into a corner right you have to be very careful about painting yourself into a corner in life
especially as a little in from a leadership position if you paint yourself into a corner you're
you're painting in that corner there's no moving there's no moving so for me
well as I look at this I'm okay I got a guy that doesn't want to go what can I get from him what
can I do with him how can I talk to him and again we don't know any of the history the guy
would know how bad of a soldier he was we know his behavior was I mean obviously he's calling the
he's calling his commander like a son of a bitch and all this stuff so he's not you can tell he's not
down for the cause right so why is that how do we build a relationship with that guy
and there's some guys that are totally overboard right they're gone like you're not going to get
him back well he there and if he's there why you actually have them out on patrol but if everything
you is kind of blocking white you're sort of you're sort of like hey this is what everyone this
is what you're going to do and you have no you paint yourself in that corner and you have no way out of it
hmm going back to the book I should never have had any problems in Vietnam because it was an
infantry war infantry and helicopters with a different quality of commanders the helicopters could have
played a very important role in command and control the unfortunate fact was that the commanders
kept their butts glued in the seats in the birds I don't think I can overemphasize the weaknesses
and heritness from 1,500 feet up war was simply a lot of little guys in green running here and there
shooting up the landscape the birdmen he's talking about the commander's fast forward a little bit
the birdmen may have been commanders in the technical sense of the word but they weren't leaders
and the grunts knew it down there was their world it was a ground war an infantry exercise and
as infantry we could have won it man for man we were better and we could have won it with less than
half the people we had there all we had to do was get rid of the wasted headquarters
chaff get rid of the px's in the state houses and the clubs and the massage parlors and the pools
and the pizza houses and the commissaries and get down to fighting an infantry war we had the training
and we had the men who could have done the job the problem was not only a lack of command leadership
but a lack of distinct mission we didn't have one before I got there we didn't have one while I was
there and we never had one after I left but an army requires a mission it desperately needs some
direction towards a specific goal it was all charts and graphs for us with machine technicians
like the West Point engineers running the show I don't think we have to be conditioned to kill
we need no training to destroy will built for that killing comes easy established no rules
and leave a vacuum and won what you end up with our me lie and cool away the absence of policy
and mission was a policy in itself need to know what the freaking mission is by the way
in war freaking absolutely I guess we'll in your normal life yes absolutely in your business
and your job yes and you know the freaking mission is fast forward as we continue to score
every night Franklin began to increase his visits to the field finally he made it a point to be on
hand personally to personally count the bodies and I found myself as his constant escort guiding him
from one dead man to the next and standing by while he snapped photos it was another syndrome
the guys that didn't kill anybody were the ones who broke their asses to get a picture
what the hell it would probably have been the same way with Indian scalps if we had cameras back then
so Franklin is out there kind of coming out and he goes through a bunch of this stuff
there's a guy named Grimshaw and we're gonna hear his name later
one of his company commanders Grimshaw said a dead VC is a dead VC and a dead NVA is a dead NVA
and a dead VCI is a dead VCI except of course when killed by the second battalion
then there are only dead if Franklin touches the touches his toe to them
and they better be wearing a uniform and have a weapon what the hell is I trying to do Franklin
asked I had to be an ass to move to rifle companies that distance in the dark why they might have
opened up on each other if either of them had become disoriented and besides he said it was one
big waste we could have taken them all in a court and search and saved all the inconvenience
so meanwhile while all this stuff is happening the the brigade is keeping battalion scores
they're keeping scores to figure out who's the best battalion who's the best battalion
they keep track of a bunch of different things enemy killed an a killed an action body count
enemy prisoners of war enemy contacts enemy weapons captured number of a wall so who's
absent how many people you got absent without lead how many article 15s have you done meaning
how many times have you punished somebody how many delinquencies have you had how many malaria
cases do you have how many relishments do you have how many special courts do you have
and then they take all these different numbers and they put them into like one final number
so here's how the numbers shake out basically they shake out the second battalion so her birds
battalion is winning in all categories it's not even close for enemy killed an action it's
uh the other battalions are 14 4 29 and 36 second battalion has 84 so more than twice as much
as the next battalion for enemy captured listen to these numbers eight zero zero and three
how many does the second battalion have 90 for enemy contacts it's 34 27 37 60 and
second battalion has 66 for enemy weapons captured it's 15 11 3 and 17
16 second battalion has 57 so this is not even it's almost like it's not even close for
absent ways that without leave so this is this should you want below number here it's 14 24 26
and 24 and what is second battalion have eight they only have eight people that have gone a
wall for article 15s the numbers are 39 56 57 and 52 what is second battalion have 24
for delinquency reports 17 9 11 10 second battalion has five malaria they're all the same
reenlistments listen to this reenlistments the numbers are zero zero 40 and zero
no one wants to frequency in what is second battalion have 53 so the total score and they have
whatever they have this wave making all this into one number second battalion for this
particular month this is February 1969 has 420 points during the lead and then the other
ones are 180 145 70 and 20 I mean just combat ineffective right and they're and by the way this is
so they're getting graded by Franklin and Barnes getting graded and they're crushing
second battalion under herbert is absolutely crushing everything but the hits just keep on coming
there's some military intelligence interrogation rooms that are on their little base
and herbert pays a visit I walked into one of the rooms and back and knocked lightly on the door
one night who's there Herbert just a moment sir someone answered and second later the door
swung inward sergeant Carmody greeted me come in sir I squeeze past him and close the door behind me
inside in addition to Carmody were captain bowers of Vietnamese man and one of the honey's
the wild cats had captured in the morning she was seated to my left in a chair against the wall
just off the corner Carmody was standing to a right my left and the Vietnamese man was sitting just
off my right foot facing the girl in the chair their knees only a couple inches apart captain
bowers was just behind the Vietnamese man sitting in a chair and leaning over the viet's shoulder
the girl was moaning and trembling find anything out I asked turning to Carmody she claims
she was out picking waterbed bugs sir he said and laughed what patrol where was it headed what about
what about the patrol where was it headed Carmody turned to her and asked something in Vietnamese
she shook her head he hit her with the back of his hand raking it down along her face you're a
fucking liar he shouted blood began to rush into the long abrasion on her cheek it began to happen
in a rush I turned to bowers thinking he would say something Carmody said something in Vietnamese
bowers nodded to the Vietnamese man in front of him and touched his shoulder with his hand the girl
screamed I glanced down and saw for the first time that there were wires from her body to a telephone
between the viet's knees he was cranking it I grabbed the wires and yanked damn near lifting the
viet up with them before the wires separated from the phone it clattered to the floor are you crazy
bowers I yelled so just so you understand these these telephone machines that you can power them
by cranking them this is an old school like telephone and so that's where he had to have these
they're basically electro shock electro electro cutinger are you crazy bowers I yelled sir I
what the hell kind of crap are you pulling here sir I go get okay sir major okay and says I don't
give a damn what he says you go get him I said I turned to comedy and knock this off until this thing
is settled bowers left and Carmody the viet and I followed him out of the hall leaving the girl
alone in the little room in a moment bowers returned major okay and isn't here he said where the
hell is he he's gone down to brigades sir and behind him through the open doorway I saw the major
getting into a Jeep I left to and walked down to Franklin's office where not surprisingly okay
was still deep in conversation with the deputy commander Franklin sigled to meet a hold up until he
was finished when okay left Franklin called me in and immediately began screaming we were right
back where he left off you son of a bitch he ran it you dirty rotten son of a bitch how many times
if I warn you to stay the hell away from MI or have your tap cut off it seemed like the time for accuracy
four times sir I said I did you understand yes sir but I understand torture too I don't give
a shit about that I sir God damn it herpurver don't you sir me I gave you a director or did you
understand it yes sir but they were torturing a viet and he said you personally see them torturing
this girl at least he knew it had been a girl yes sir they US soldiers no sir this viet
to meet God damn it Herbert how many times must I explain the rules of land warfare to you over here
what the Vietnamese do is none of our damn business but sir the guy was cranking this phone generator
while bowers was who is cranking the generator this interpreter I guess and was he viet to meet
yes sir but and was bowers cranking no sir but then God damn it that's the end of it okay and said
that's all there is to know he lifted his hand as shook his finger one more god damn interference
Herbert and you're all washed up at MI understand no sir I don't carmety was did you see
carmety crank the phone no sir did you see any US crank that phone no sir then what's your bitch
it was the first time I had to really compose a sentence for one thing I told him it was a
violation of US army directives as well as Geneva Accords and the rules of land warfare
and for another I finished it just isn't army oh you son of a bitch he said you're so
God damn righteous you never did anything like that right no sir I haven't he slapped the girl
end and you never have honor of it is that correct that is correct sir I but you saw comedy
slap her huh yes sir I did and and so all at once you're the judge the jury and the executioner
is that correct Herbert no sir I know sir I know sir I know sir I tell you what you are Herbert you're
a disloyal and you're maybe getting kind of old you just can't stomach it anymore what the hell
is a matter with you look he said with relative benevolence in his voice let me explain these are the
enemy even you must be able to understand that right these are the guys who killed your buddies
whom did she kill sir God damn it I'm talking about the enemy in general he said raising his hand
let me put it this way their VC I decided there was no sense in carrying out this farce any further
and we were supposed to be soldiers and we are supposed to be soldiers sir American soldiers
I want to make a charge I'd like to charge charge my ass you've already made a charge and now it's
an investigation and I'll take care of that not you you just be able to back your mouth with sworn
verified testimony sure I said sir anytime yeah so again it's very strange not very strange but
you can see this guy he seems to be trying to do the right thing but man he's making some enemies
I guess big part of his me trying my best to look at it from all or more than just herbards perspective
and he kind of got it meant when you think about it where you don't want to like
okay when you're in a complex situation and you have like a goal and then you have all these rules
sometimes those rules do get kind of looked over some on a smaller level right and sometimes it
can be more efficient meanwhile you got this guy who's kind of by the book and most people are
most people I'm pretty I almost want to say everybody's not going to be by the book hundred
percent of the time okay in one way or another and you get a group of people and they're they're
carrying out a goal whatever and and it's working and it's working out and they're okay well that's
an assumption yeah because it doesn't because let's face it if we just look well how well the
battalions are doing his battalions doing the best and he's kind of flying the the righteous path yeah
yeah fully and yeah this is this particular story aside I'm saying in general okay and then you get
whether be a new guy or just somebody there who's always like how should I's not in my
commanding but like nitpicking or certain things and it kind of jams up your whole approach to
what you're doing sure it could be better or not or whatever but it becomes kind of a nuisance you know
well okay I mean I see what you're saying but let's let's remember that this guy is witnessing
murders tortures sexual assaults which I didn't really cover rapes which I didn't really cover but
they're in here he's he's seeing all kinds of horrible shit this isn't somebody this isn't all
of these people are kind of bending the rules to get the job done the same that yeah fully and that's
what I mean so and that's what I mean just what you said like people bending the rules to get the job
done kind of a thing right we we understand that yes and he understands it right remember the guy
that got told hey bring back the mermaids on your patrol and and the guy says this is stupid and
Herbert says well it's an order and he says fuck them remember that part he's down with bending
the rules if the rules don't make sense right yeah fully and uh and yes that is true and we got a good
bird's eye view of the whole deal for sure but the guy this guy that he's talking to Franklin
yeah Franklin from his perspective he might be looking at it as hey we're bending the rules to get
the job done he might be genuine feeling that he might be he might be now what you have to fall back on
as you have to you have to fall back and this is a tough one you have to fall back not only on
what is the right thing to do but you also have to bounce that off of one is legal yeah okay so
for the young leaders out there especially military leaders but this applies to anything this applies
to business because look there's things there's things you do in business where oh there's the right
thing to do and then there's the wrong thing to do and then there's the legal thing to do
and then yeah there's the criminal thing to do so when you're doing something hey listen I can
explain this you know the the CNN test have you ever heard of this before look if I can go on CNN
and say hey this is why I made this decision and you don't feel shame because of what you did
that's definitely part of the test the other thing you got to remember is what is legal because
if you let and this is something you can tell you your your employees or your troops
you got to remember about what's legal because someone that should steer because look if if
you're let's say you're in a you're in a platoon you're out on a target and you find somebody that's
killed Americans right they freaking kill they have the bodies and you catch them with the bodies
and with the freaking bloody knife there's almost no one that would say okay well I don't feel
like killing those bad guys right there's a guy with a bloody knife you see them killing Americans
to say hey do the right thing a lot of people look I don't know the right thing to do is we kill
that guy we execute them you have you have to remember that that is not legal you are not allowed
to do that so you have to get your people to understand that regardless of how you feel
it's not just to see an end test because that kind of past the CNN test hey I showed up
this guy killed a bunch of Americans and we freaking we I shot him and you can that's the
way it is and I I'd feel no shame because of it you pass the CNN test guess what you can still go
to you can sell what a jail it's legally wrong so as a leader what you have to do you have to
sort of merge all these ideas into one final thought and you have to take the fact that hey what
this is not legal to do this this is not legal to do this now there's others we could come up with
scenarios where doing the legal thing still isn't the right thing and it's actually wrong it's wrong
to do that and sometimes you may have to break that rule but what we're talking about here is
they're doing things that are not legal yeah so regardless of how you feel you're doing something
that is not legal on a very in a very big way these aren't minor charges these are war crimes
scenarios which right this isn't like hey we've been through we we left some freaking
mermaids out in the field which is pretty easy to argue right hey listen my guys were already tired
we were if we're gonna carry these things it was gonna bog us down we had a better chance
to get an ambush it was gonna be a problem I left them okay got it that's not war crimes
yeah so there's a there's a difference yeah yeah there does there comes a point where it gets
like you just can't defend certain things you know and yeah especially when you're talking about
like you got to remember that's not even just that you can't defend him because if I roll up
and I find an ISIS fighter that killed three people you can defend that all day you can defend
oh yeah I saw him I'm a shot him he killed three Americans I saw him doing it you can defend
that all day long but it's not legal so now you got to deal with the ramifications whatever those are
yeah you're seeing the movie cobra no come on so best of us alone cobra I have not seen it
dang all watchbook two new watch cobra no not deal so there's a fight there's a fight in the
beginning where this psycho guy takes over the supermarket or whatever right and cobra is kind of one
of these guys he uses excessive force you know kind of like demolition men same actor by the way so
that's just so either way so cobra ends up killing this guy right and then the the
press comes not CNN but the press comes and they're trying to interview cobra and they're like
he's like hey did you have to kill him you know did you have to die or did you you know
you know he has a right to live and all this stuff for whatever and he's like yeah he's
you'll did you use excessive force and all this he's like yeah he used everything I have
and he's like hey you know like people are protected are protected you know entitled to
protection by the law or whatever and he says so he grabs the recorder and unwraps or he
uncovers like one of the bodies right and he's like you tell that to his family huh
he passed the CNN test is what I'm saying yeah I think it was legal too though technically
it depends on the situation it was like borderline so yeah I don't want to go into the movie
what happened you know to kind of to get cobra off the hook or nothing like that but nonetheless
that's the CNN test it seems like yeah no that so so the CNN test is but it's not a
it's not a unilateral test that just because it passed I see it's okay that's what I'm
trying to explain to young leaders it's not just the CNN test it's the CNN test
plus it's the legal test is what you're doing legal or is it illegal and if it's illegal
there are going to be repercussions even if you pass the CNN test so as a leader you've got to
pay attention those things and what you have to do is keep your troops out of trouble that's
incumbent upon you to keep your troops out of trouble because they they might be reacting emotionally
and you're the one that's supposed to rain them in and make sure that they're not getting not
not doing things that are illegal and I'm not saying those things are deserved you know you find
somebody that just killed three Americans that that ISIS member deserves to die we get it
not legal yeah not so out so where did these go and and my original point was like Franklin
maybe to him it was he was quote unquote like I said maybe bending a few rules or
returning a blind eye just just small minor things and the means kind of justified the end
scenario and yeah I agree I think that's true or it's like well I remember we're
slitting a girls throat yeah yeah fully we have to leaders have to lead their troops to make
sure that they are not just doing the right thing that they're not just passing the CNN test
but they're also doing what's legal otherwise there's going to be repercussions that's just
that's just the way it is the seriality all right back to the book when I remember the
folly of it all now I rationalize a bit and tell myself that there wasn't enough time to be
fully sensitive to the finality of death for instance to say that it had not been a very
important day because the second battalion had but two NVA kills now seems ludicrous it was a
damn important day for those two dead men when even just one man died or got his fingers blown
off for his legs shattered or is hearing impaired or his eyes bludded and blinded it was one hell
of a costly battle especially if you happen to be the guy who got it that day it's something
generals and presidents can never understand only mothers fathers brothers sons daughters and wives
maybe if I were a general or a president who never went to war with his men or who never
risked paying the same price maybe I'd want to convert the whole damn show into a statistical
table to be read solemnly by some broadcaster every Thursday night generals and presidents are
fine for explaining to all of us those things that we ought to be willing to die for but when the war
is over all that's left our statistics and the generals and the presidents are always among the living
if anything has happened to our country as a result of the Vietnam war it is that our
national infection with the sickness of the numbers game we reduced the blood and the suffering
and the death and destruction to mere ciphers and in doing so we reduced our own souls
numbers don't die people do
columns of figures don't disintegrate in the explosion of a bomb human beings do
statistics don't bleed and if you make your war a war of numbers you will have no trouble sleeping
most generals and presidents slept well
so this stuff is continuing on in another mind boggling plot twist on April 2, 1969 Barnes
gave me a letter of commendation from general counters who had replaced general peers as the
commander of the first field force victor he also handed me a letter from peers which had come all the way
from the states peers was quite complimentary and Barnes added that the second battalion was the
best in the brigade and that I was the best battalion commander he had personally ever known so that's
Franklin's boss then he handed me his own letter of commendation the score sheet for the brigade
which again listed the second battalion as the top battalion and the official IG report which listed
the second battalion as the tops in the brigade he also assured me that I would very soon begin
reaping the awards rewards for my efforts as he called them he said the distinguished
service cross was being prepared and the general already had a verbal assurance it would be approved
he's getting some love I went back to the battalion and sat down with warm islas bourbon my god what was
happening two months of nothing but crap and now all this in one day maybe things really were going
to be different maybe the brigade was going to shape up with less than two and a half months to go
sweetness and light were in the air and there were signs that everything was going to be okay
but something else nodded me I had reported eight atrocities or war crimes or whatever the
hell they wanted to call them the abuse of the detainees at on k the three torture incidents the
murders the looting the alleged murder of a young lieutenant and the alleged execution of the
detainee in the custody of the hero lieutenant if I could get those things cleared up I'd really be up
to date and I knew I'd better get my statements down sooner or I'd have to get them in writing
from back in the states taking time out of the command in general staff college at 11 worth
and I didn't expect to have that kind of time so yeah this all comes really clear right now
I went down on the morning of April 3rd so the next day to talk to Franklin about them
Sir I jokingly said when I entered your best batying commander of yesterday would like to have
a talk with you today okay sure Herbert come in he said have a seat I sat down where he
indicated it was only it was the only chair in the room what's on your mind the eight allegations sir
the atrocities I reported I want atrocities he interrupted what the hell are you talking about
atrocities eight sir and I took them off one by one counting them on my fingers as I went sir
I'm going home in less than two weeks and most of the other witnesses have already gone I'd
like to get my part wound up now while I still have time and things are going kind of slow
God damn it Tony said the investigations are ongoing what more can I do
the next morning when I reported Barnes was behind his desk and Franklin was in the chair to his
right it was quick Colonel Herbert the general said I'm going to replace you as the commander of second
battalion I felt the blood drained from my head replace sir you mean relief not relief Tony replace
I'm giving you a maximum efficiency report and sending you to Saigon hit me like a ton of rocks
it is is it over the allegations I made sir Franklin leap to his feet screaming that's right you
son of a bitch you and your goddamn lies about beach and crouched and all the rest that poor lieutenant
and every other one of your damn lies and exaggerations so clearly they were buttering him up
hey you've done great you're our best battalion we're got you we give you a maximum efficiency report
like you're the best guy how about you just freaking keep the old mouth shut my allegations
and then when he brings him up again they realize he's going to stick to his guns
I felt cold and empty then a wave of relief swept over me in calm said and I stared at Franklin
as though he were in insect and I tried to speak as deliberately and as cool as I could
I'm not talking to you sir I'm trying to speak to my commander general Barnes
it stopped Franklin's ranting and he gave me the chance to turn back to Barnes sir the very
least you owe me is a complete investigation to see who really is telling the lies and exaggerating
the general had his head down over his desk tripling on a piece of note paper
Carl Franklin has already investigated all your charges and I'm satisfied he said reaching out and
handing me the note you'll be out on the landing zone in one hour there are two planes leaving
for side gone today you be on one of them your records will be ready for you an onk when you
in side gone or onk when you get there you report to Colonel Lou Ashley in side gone it's on the note
sir I said I have a battalion I've signed for over a million dollars with a material and
an equipment I just can't clear out in an hour Franklin broken one hour herberg one hour you'll be
picked up under arrest and taken out by the provost marshal one hour Barnes said again
I saluted don't do many favors with the efficiency report I intend to see you all again
so even though they said we're gonna let you out of here with a good evaluation he's saying don't even
this dude does not play bro
as I walk back to the battalion I told myself it was important to remain calm
co-inclected I knew I had them both just as long as I didn't blow it they had gone far beyond
their authority in removing me without any grounds for relief I was convinced by then
that it had to be something more than any allegations of atrocities hell everybody knew about
them anyways somebody else would be bringing them up again and soon if they thought that by
getting rid of me they were also getting rid of the shame of what it occurred then they that they
had got it under the rug they neither understood me nor the army at that point I still had faith in
the system I walked over to the talk Ernie had most of the officers gathered in the briefing room
he had already told them look I began there's no time to screw around you know I've been given the
boot that's why I wanted to talk to you all right away I've only got about 15 minutes more before
I have to get out of here but I wanted to take some time to thank you and get the chance to shake as many
of your hands that could before I have to go there were some protests and a few remarks about quitting
I stifled that quickly the army has a system of military justice and rules and rags so none of
you need to go off half cocked and try and take things into your own hands nobody quit see there
just keep thinking about the battalion that's what's important not me if you're if you
quit you're letting down not only me but every last one of those grunts out here they have to stay
they can't quit you can but many of them need you and the guy who replaces me is going to need you
it's not going to be his fault what happened to me so stick with the battalion and stick with him and
stick with them I said waving toward the booties I started shaking hands in the in the landing zone
area men all along the ground were lined up pulling off smoke canisters of every color in the rainbow
there were maybe a hundred men out there and a hundred smokes it was their honors smoke
when the troops were coming back after a kill they buzzed the field with a smoke on each skid
and when one of their own left they lit one to five depending on how well he was like
light plus his reputation as a fighter and I was looking down on at least a hundred of them knowing
all the time that nobody was that good but choked up with appreciation nevertheless
I waved and they waved back the pilot bank the ship again and I sat against the wall rigging
and wiped my eyes
we landed in Saigon a bit before nine o'clock that evening and although I shouldn't have
been feeling like a bastard on father's day I didn't although I should have been feeling
like a bastard on father's day I didn't I was relieved in more ways than one I suppose I
reasoned that if Barnes and Franklin had hated me that much I was better off out of the outfit
I had the marbles in my pocket they had nothing to fall back on but their own lies and false
effications I knew I had been lucky I could have had accidental kills of women and children or other
non-combatants and they would have had me had the marbles in their pockets I could have ranked second
or third on the IG inspection I could have had a high court martial rate or accident rate or
large number of article 15s or delinquencies reports from the military police or any one of a number
of other things that could have been used against me but I've been lucky frankly I'm used I had
let Franklin I'm used had let his personal dislike for me get the best of him it had forced him
into a premature confrontation that I was bound to win I was bound to win well
it was not that clear cut it was not that clear cut at all and the book goes on and it goes into
a lot of detail and there are all kinds of further accusations and counter accusations and they end up
making sworn statements against Herbert including him leading the killing of civilians so they
start making accusations against him and this is and again these documents are in this book that's
one of the things that makes this book so good is it's got all this actual documentation here they
they recommend revoking disorders they recommend removing his opportunity to to lead or being
command again general rust who's the overall decision maker on the case agrees with the accusatory
statements kills Colonel Herbert's career so the idea that he was bound to win no actually doesn't
work out that way Colonel Herbert fights it he fights this spends a bunch of his own money
and then he goes on the offense because he won in investigations before now he goes on the offense
charges uh brings charges up against Colonel Franklin 14 separate specifications including
failure to report murders and church torture he does the same thing to general barns fail up failure
to report war crimes on multiplications so he's going on the offense it gets national publicity it's in the
news the lead investigator for the army this guy by the name of major Carl Hensley
according to the book and I hate to say that I'm just because I don't know what I don't know
what the truth is according to the book this guy major Carl Hensley had told Herbert like look we
believe you you're right we can win this thing and then he kills himself kills himself with a
shotgun you can you can look that one up it's in a New York Times press briefing major Carl Hensley
suicide ends up all the charges are eventually dropped against both barns and Franklin
Colonel Franklin eventually relieved from his command for throwing a Vietnamese body out of
a helicopter in Vietnam and again this guy was the most decorated from what I could find in
research most decorated officer from his West Point class 1950 1991 by the way Colonel Franklin
convicted and spent five years in prison for us securities scheme scam swindled about $100 people out
a million dollars so there's like you know you see these questionable characters characteristics
so all the charges so imagine us all the charges against barns and Franklin get dropped
but Herbert is not charged with making a single fall statement so all these things that he had said
he never gets charged for making a fall statement but the charges get dropped
he goes kind of public does a bunch of interviews eventually he's retired or he retires
you know he's done with the army he gets eventually he gets interviewed on 60 minutes by Mike Wallace
and this is freaking crazy so they have and I've tried to find this him been able to find it
but I read about it they have Herbert getting interviewed by Mike Wallace he kind of tells his story
and then out of the other room they bring major grim shot who was part of the unit who comes out and says yeah look
I worked for Herbert I know Herbert I respect Herbert but what he said isn't true
so so now who he's supposed to believe so Herbert sues Mike Wallace in 60 minutes for libel
it's a 13 year court case it's a 13 year court case eventually gets all the way to supreme court
and Herbert loses the case Herbert eventually he became a clinical psychologist and also police
psychologists dies of cancer June 7th 2014
just the the whole thing is a travesty and I guess the best thing we can do is
what can we learn from it what can we learn from it I would say the obvious lesson here is
put your ego aside and build relationships with people now you might say well these people
were doing wrong okay so what what good do you do when you just build form an antagonist
relation could you have more influence over them or less influence over them you have less
so if you can build a relationship with people now listen this is again this is some freaking
hard this is what makes leadership part if these if there's people that are doing things that are
moral illegal and ethical okay what are you going to do you can do what Herbert did stand up to
him and guess what he gets fired now he has no influence over the situation
because if you think like you have to stop that that's my moral obligation to stop this
stuff from happening was did Colonel Herbert stop from happening no he said he's gone he has no
more influence who took over his baton some yes man when a Colonel Franklin's you know boys
that came in and started telling the party line so freaking disaster it's just a disaster you get
you get the high ground great you got the high ground and then you and then you
look down on people and you get an antagonistic relationship with him yeah and there's all
all the stuff is documented you got to read the book and I'm sure we could have more
discussions maybe we will maybe we'll bring some maybe we'll find somebody that was there
that knows more about it and now let's look there's two sides to every story too I mean you
are you pointed out you know what are they just trying to get the job done
is he was he exaggerating some of this I don't know I don't know my original take
was that this guy is like a hack my original information that I got was this guy was a
hack worth type individual from that was from from Colonel how his Herbert had worked for his
grandfather right so this is like a close to getting right now that we can go off of I don't know
I don't know I know that leadership is a freaking challenge I know that
and this book proves it
hate this feeling echo Charles the kind of empty feeling yeah sure don't like it yeah and so
I don't like when I can't really identify the truth I can't like it yeah and that's kind of why
I did think about that we're thinking about the other people's perspective you know
and with that kind of you kind of think like how did how did let's say that the guys like all
wrong like because let's face according to the story kind of sounds like they're almost like
corrupt almost where they're like hey who cares you know kind of thing so it's like what
was the what we just have a straight up corrupt military is that what you saying like in that little
but it's horrible for us to think that this entire division or this entire brigade at a minimum
was corrupt yeah and that's what I'm thinking but the reality is like so these aren't like bad people
like most people aren't just bad people who are just like destined for corruption or whatever
it's almost like you kind of got to consider how did they get there why is it like that it's not
because they're just these evil people who finally got there position of power and now can just
exploit weakness and nothing like that but you take and you put all these factors in place like
the fact that hey if you go do this tour you're going to get promoted you're going to get more money
you're you got to go do this and when you get over there well what's the best way to get a good
evaluation you get a good evaluation by doing whatever else is doing late you know you don't want to
stick your head up and be the one that gets draws a bunch of attention so if that's what we're doing
you know it's an expression that you use you use this expression that's what we're doing you know
like you'll say oh that's I thought that's just what we were doing yeah you use that expression sometimes
well that's a normal thing for people to feel look that's what we're doing okay that's what's
everyone else is doing I'm on okay yeah if we're gonna let the Vietnamese kind of run and do
whatever they want if that's what we're doing cool I don't want to be the one that's drawn a bunch
of attention myself they know about me so I'm just going to kind of sit back and let it happen yeah
so people getting that mode and you lose vision here's the other thing I can't much confidence
do you have in yourself to say like hey everyone here is wrong everyone here that's letting this
happen as wrong you know how do you not feel like wait a second there's you know a brigade of
5,000 people here and everyone's kind of down with what's happening and I'm the person that's not
there's something wrong here maybe it's wrong maybe there's something wrong with me yeah
and you get the momentum and the inertia of you get the inertia of hey hey we're going to get a new
Italian commander soon enough don't worry about this guy we got he's going to be going to do
here for six months what what are we trying to do make money right we can run these little scams and
make some money we we just want to have the time pass so I can move on I can just be done with my
job trust me that's that's a real thing even in today's military like have you ever heard
does zero defect zero defect model where it's like oh yeah we're gonna promote someone that has
had no mistakes so if you're over on deployment if you're an Iraq or you're an Afghanistan
and you want to get promoted and there's a mission to go do and you get to decide whether you
go do that mission or not do you think you should do it or not oh yeah got it yeah so if you don't
basically if you don't take that much action you don't want make that mean mistakes right
on you can have the zero defect record you have the zero defect record I went on deployment I did
four missions they all went well get a bronze star go home get a good evaluation and we're good to go
or I'm gonna go over there I'm gonna do a hundred missions every single one of those missions is
a freaking challenge and by the way if you're doing four missions you can kind of hand pick
like if you do 10 missions you do 20 missions you're hand pick okay this one's not bad not about
area we've got really good intel looks good all right go look go ahead and execute this one
all right if you're gonna do a hundred missions you're going okay look this one's a little bit more
high risk but we're gonna go it seems like a well-making impact will go executed there's a tendency
well not a tendency there's a possibility that you say you know what look I don't want to have
everyone get hurt I don't want to have any bad you know I don't have any negatives on my evaluation
I just want to get my job done to move on you know I want to punch the ticket so you end up doing
14 missions and you did your job good for you and now you get your ticket punched and you go home
and everyone's good and by the way when you get home because it was get rid of everyone says hey
he did it he was a he was a company commander he was a baton commander he did it you know he's a combat
experienced veteran as he said right so now are you kind of on a pedestal a little bit yeah
even though you really don't know anything so what I'm saying is the system even more so
in Vietnam was all set up where hey get over there keep your mouth shut go with the flow
fitting with the crew yeah and that's why hack worth had such a freaking issue with it and so did
herber makes sense so almost like they should maybe think about and I'm saying this with
complete ignorance by the way but they should change the little system to be you know like diving
you're much diving like I don't know Olympics or whatever diving right like platform whatever they have
they have a discord and the difficulty level exactly right so you get a score for difficulty level
and if the difficulty level is low you're not gonna get a high score you know yeah it's true and that's
fine again the system is really it's very easy for the system to fall back into a zero defect
mentality a risk of vers mentality because look I could go on to point it tomorrow and circumstances
could be that there's just not a lot going on and so we did four missions not because we want
aggressive but because there wasn't that many missions to do and so I'd come back and you can't look
down on me you can't say well joccal when we did four missions I did all the ones that I could
I was aggressive as I could possibly be we only did four you go on deployment there's you could
do a hundred missions but you only do four you come back sad as many as jocca were good to go and
I'm a overall leader I wasn't there so I'm looking at go hey I go did four jocquitted four hey
these guys are equivalent we're good to go move on meanwhile you were super risk of earth didn't
take any chances really didn't impact their battlefield and you're gonna get the same recognition
so it's a very difficult thing to do it's a very difficult thing then you can see you can see
that Vietnam just got so wrapped up in this this careerism of hey go do your time keep your mouth shut
getting you know go with the flow and that's that what are the missions that we're doing okay we're doing
that kind of mission cool oh got it we got guys smoking pot no one really seems to notice that
oh we're getting smoke and pot like it's just bad across the board and a lot of it has to do with what
is our mission what is our mission why what what what what means we want what means we want
if you don't even know what means you want how are you gonna you know if you went on a football field
and you didn't know what how if you didn't know how to score a goal what would you do
what would you do you wouldn't be able to do anything you wouldn't but as long as you know
hey here's where you're trying to get to okay got it give me that ball moving to foot down the
field I'm moving to yard down the field I'm moving and inch down the field you're at least
know which direction you're moving it if you get told hey go out on that field you know when
tells you where the end zone is right no no one tells you so what are you gonna do so as a leader
you gotta take that into account you gotta make sure people know what the mission is you gotta know what
the strategy is when you better know why you're going to war and you better make that perfectly
clear when you're going check empty feeling sorry don't like it all right so what else can we do
this is just a freaking well speaking of empty feelings I have one two three cans of empty
two and a half cans of empty just plain go some of the take this opportunity to tell our people
what does plain go is I'm glad because I'm just I had some two but I still feel I'm still so empty
alright hey it's all good well okay I won't start with discipline go how about that we'll just
talk about jockel fuel in general okay look we're on the path we're learning stuff lessons hard
any easy by the way obviously well you know how they say like there's hard lessons like the
hard lessons are the ones that are learned like the best yes true he who suffers remembers
yeah yeah so boom so we're on the path right we're looking for lessons we're learning from lessons
learning from lessons from others that's one of those efficiency things yeah there's some great
leadership lessons in the both these books that's for sure like some read like that thing about
planning if you let your team come up with a plan they're invested they have a material interest in
seeing the plants succeed that right there's gold read those books look you come away feeling empty
like I did let me fill in that whole little bit there I just did I just filled in my own hole in my
heart for getting to the end of this book by saying hey if you let your team come up with a plan
if they have a material interest in making the plan succeed there you go I feel better already
me too so yes the last one the path and through that path a lot of people know about the path
they don't walk the path I saw that meme today since I'm in my head but when we when we do walk the path
we may need assistance assistance through whether it be mentorship guidance or supplementation
yeah it's for supplementation goes we have jockel fuel so we got stuff for joints we got stuff for protein we
got stuff for a brain and we got stuff for immunity that's it right more or less or I'm just getting
stronger with the moke yes that's the protein that's the original product oh yeah so and here's the
thing thank you to about something else I understand for here's the thing here's the formula for
getting strong could you tell I was like not with you yeah okay I'm just making sure I'm very used to that
dynamic you usually I'm paying attention well depends on what you mean by usually but true
anyway the formula for getting strong that if you've sensed that for me it should be a non-verbal
cue to talk fast and kind of rap yeah I thought that in the beginning but now you don't care
there while yeah it's just what I don't care I'm very used to you have no material interested moving
it's gonna be a long which is fine I'm a material interest but it's very small nonetheless okay
the material formula for being strong is three things the correct exercise the correct
rest in recovery and the correct fuel nutrition slash fuel slash food if you'll ever yeah moke
is part of that last part the fuel forgetting strong seem saying so yeah moke will make you
strong as long as those other two things are in places well sure anyway go to jockelfuel.com for all
these things score score some supplementation for this path that we are walking not just knowing
you can also get a vitamin shop you can also get it at wallaw well you can get the
discipline go drinks at wallaw if you need some energy so then you can go to wallaw and get some
and also all these things was a kind of cool you're you're you're gonna want to get
you're gonna want to get them and have them there when you need them so you want to subscribe
and if you subscribe you get free shipping you and shipping can be expensive yeah you know it's
yeah the I think the main benefit aside from the discount for sure is you not having to think about it
that is you can think about other stuff no that is a that is a definite benefit so you're getting
paid basically to do something that's already good for you yeah double dip you're right
right rotation of justice so getting paid you know how they say a penny saved is a penny
earned that's it right yep it's kind of thing is more of a framing thing okay not to go too deep on
framing but if you just said you just said you're getting paid to do something you are healthy
yep in a way right you are so if you subscribe you're getting paid to do something that's good for you
yeah which is awesome yeah check that out jockelfuel.com also we got a bunch of jigset's your stuff
if you are in the jiu-jitsu which you should be like all accounts you should be in the jiu-jitsu
go to origin at usa.com you can get your jiu-jitsu stuff but if you're let's say you haven't
gotten an in the jiu-jitsu yet you're going to but you still need clothing for your body you need jeans
you need boots you need t-shirts you need oddies sure you need hats well
this is a lot of benefits to hats yeah you don't wear a hat ever pretty much anyways you can
get all that stuff american made made America made in America yeah origin usa.com check it out also
jockel has a store as well for more of those shirts and hats um putty's what shorts by the way shorts yes
which I'm wearing right now oh yeah definitely sure shorts oh yeah yeah hard-core
condo shirt that's what I'm wearing today in honor of come baby hot-worth yes sir check
yep that's a good one uh yeah let's let us stuff on there um i say it's to represent wall
we're on the path that's what you say and that is true every time but there's a little bit more to it
you got to find out for yourself also we have a subscription situation on there too for a little
bit different types of designs little bit more creative we enlisted john bozac who just happens to be
maybe not happens to be because this is all for a reason but he is the illustrator for the
way the way kid series and my kids dragons and Mike in the dragons and some postages as well
anyway this is good artists we enlisted him for some of the designs on this subscription
shirt situation called the shirt locker check you know when looking to that if you like that
amen get that jocca store dot com is where that's it we got you can you can subscribe to this podcast
or the other podcast we got a jocca on rambling got a few new episodes of that out their savage
grounded podcast which we haven't done in a while but where your kid podcast we got some new those
new of those out if you want to you can check all those out you can subscribe you can also join us
on the underground the ug jocca ug jocca on the ground dot com little alternative podcast we've been
doing some q and a on there from people that are on jocca on the ground if you want to subscribe to
that go to jocca on the ground dot com it costs eight dollars and eighteen cents a month
if you can't afford that it's okay we don't want to exclude you because you're having a financial rough
spot if you want to hear what we're talking about you can go to even email assistance at jocca
on the ground dot com yeah also give you to channel video version of this podcast also have excerpts
on there so you can be enlightened in the event of you missing a certain concept of whatever you
know we try to post those regularly so so yeah we can you can check those out we're verified
to by the way on youtube proud of that all right did you ever get that thing were you supposed to get
something um unlike a plaque or something oh yeah yeah the play button or something I think that's
when you get to a certain amount of subscribers I did not get it no how many subscribers do you have
to have oh I for there's different plaques so I think you get one I could be wrong like after 10
or 100 thousand and then after a million if I'm not mistaken and then after 10 million subscribers
how many do we have uh we broke the threshold of one million so technically we should have
two play button somewhere somewhere on here I don't know I got a double check to play what play button
oh button I can't throw these anyway yeah we have a youtube channel how about that okay
except the psychological warfare we got an album with tracks where I talk about
overcoming the moment of weakness we have flips i canvas dot com decoder mire
put now things that you can hang on your wall that look cool books bunch of books
soldier which is the book we cover today the making of a soldier the book we covered last
podcast they're both by Anthony Herbert final spin it's a story that I wrote might be
a poem I'm not sure you're gonna have to check it out yourself it's available for pre-order right now
I'm sure the publisher is like well there's probably only gonna be you know we'll probably only
sell 50 of these so we'll print 50 mm if you don't pre-order don't be mad pre-order so you can get
that first that dish leadership strategy intact is field manual the code the evaluation
is a protocol this means freedom fan you field manual all the warrior kid books micing the dragon
about face extreme ownership of the dichotomy leadership I have a leadership consultancy
it's called echelon front you can go to echelon front dot com for details if you want us to
help inside your organization we have online training ef on line dot com we've got a bunch of
live events including the muster 2021 go to extreme ownership dot com if you want to come to
one of those we've got ef battlefield we've got ftx if you want to help service members
active and retired service members their families gold star families check out mark
leaves mom mom and leash he's got a charity organization if you want to donate or you want to get involved
go to america's mighty warriors dot org and if you want more of my
drawn-out orations or you'll need more of echelos questionable queries you can find us on the
in the web's on twitter on the gram and on facebook echelos adecquatrails i am at jockel
will in kitt thanks to all the people out there in the service of our nation around the world
just trying to remember that the enemies outside the wire and trying to keep the eagles in check
and support each other and to our police and law enforcement firefighters and paramedics and
EMTs and dispatchers and correction officers in board patrol and secret service and all first responders
out there every single day thank you for doing what you do so that we can do what we do
and to everyone else listen antagonistic relationships do not help you in life they don't help
your mission they don't help your team if you don't agree with somebody on something find something
that you do agree on build bonds instead of breaking them there is enough in the world
trying to rip a support fight that it's how we all win in the end
and until next time zekko and jockel out